[Amit Varma]: In the online writing course I teach, I often talk about the importance of regular writing.
[Amit Varma]: I think of the ability to write as akin to a muscle. If you want to develop your muscles
[Amit Varma]: to build your body, you have to work out regularly. Similarly, if you want to develop your writing
[Amit Varma]: muscle, you have to build a habit of reading and writing. And one nuance here that I'm
[Amit Varma]: beginning to appreciate more and more is that your writing habit will not only change your
[Amit Varma]: writing, it will change you as a person. The more we write, the better we understand the
[Amit Varma]: world and the more we understand ourselves. Writing, in a sense, can be like therapy even.
[Amit Varma]: This is especially so if it takes a form of journaling. Previous guests on the show, like
[Amit Varma]: Amitabha Kumar and Samarth Bansal, have spoken about how journaling changed who they were,
[Amit Varma]: made them more self-aware and reflective. And my guest today, by writing about her life,
[Amit Varma]: her parenting, her relationships, has also shown us a power of turning our gaze inwards.
[Amit Varma]: It's hard to do, because it can mean abandoning the comfort of our self-delusions. It can
[Amit Varma]: mean confronting all that is ugly about us. But it can be so, so rewarding.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. My guest today is Natasha Bhadwar, who started off
[Amit Varma]: as a cinematographer in the first wave of Indian satellite television, established herself
[Amit Varma]: there and then left it to reinvent herself as a writer of personal essays. A mother of
[Amit Varma]: three daughters, she started writing about parenting, first on a blog and then in a celebrated
[Amit Varma]: column for Mint Lounge. Her first book was a wonderful collection of essays called My
[Amit Varma]: Daughter's Mum. I recorded an early episode with her about this book a few years ago.
[Amit Varma]: This was back in the day when my episodes were half an hour miniatures, which is ironic
[Amit Varma]: because someone as self-reflective as Natasha is perfect for the current format of the show,
[Amit Varma]: which is akin to oral history and is more about people than subjects. Since we last
[Amit Varma]: recorded, she's published another fine book, Immortal for a Moment, shifted her column
[Amit Varma]: from Lounge to the Tribune, started a newsletter on Substack, and she also now teaches a memoir
[Amit Varma]: writing course. Her personal essays are more than just personal. Franz Kafka once described
[Amit Varma]: literature as an axe for the frozen sea within us. By writing about her own life and relationships,
[Amit Varma]: Natasha reveals deeper truths about all of us, about our lives and relationships. Even
[Amit Varma]: when she writes about parenting, which I have zero interest in, I keep finding nuggets of
[Amit Varma]: wisdom which force me to think about my own self. Her writing also tells us a lot about
[Amit Varma]: the society around us. She talks about mental health issues, especially of children, and
[Amit Varma]: how we often, quote, do not name the estrangement we feel, stop quote. She writes about how
[Amit Varma]: so much of what would qualify as child abuse is normalized in our schools. She talks about
[Amit Varma]: her decision to unschool her children and why our education systems are so broken. She
[Amit Varma]: speaks about her search for home. She speaks about how every marriage is a work in progress
[Amit Varma]: and the different ways in which our society is broken today. Most of all, she speaks about
[Amit Varma]: the value of living an examined life. I learnt a lot from this episode, which is one of my
[Amit Varma]: favourites and I'm sure you'll enjoy it as well. Before we begin though, let's take a
[Amit Varma]: quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs Rs 10,000 plus GST, or
[Amit Varma]: about $150 and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register at IndiaUncut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing. That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. Being a good writer doesn't
[Amit Varma]: require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you
[Amit Varma]: need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Natasha, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Guest]: It's wonderful to be back.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's wonderful to have you back because the show was very different when we last recorded
[Amit Varma]: with the conception of the show was shorter conversations. It is about a subject. So the
[Amit Varma]: name of our episode was parenthood. And I've kind of moved on to much longer episodes where
[Amit Varma]: I'm not so interested in subjects per se, but more on people, you know, and since I
[Amit Varma]: now do five, six hour conversations, I thought you are like literally, you know, a tailor
[Amit Varma]: made guest for the show, because one of the things that you do so well, is self reflection.
[Amit Varma]: And which is, you know, all your writing is just so powerful for that reason. And I think
[Amit Varma]: that's why people who read you also feel that strong connection. Because by writing about
[Amit Varma]: yourself, I think you're writing about all of us. But anyway, I could go on with the
[Amit Varma]: praise. But let's, you know, we're sitting here in 2022. To begin with, let's catch up.
[Amit Varma]: You know, how have the COVID years been for you? Like, what have you been doing? How have
[Amit Varma]: the COVID years been? How have things progressed?
[Guest]: Yeah. COVID's been such a shock. And I think we're still in it. We really haven't had the
[Guest]: time to process the first lockdown, which was all about the huge, you know, the hunger
[Guest]: crisis and the migration in India and civil societies suddenly waking up in nearly a state
[Guest]: of panic and trying to help people who were out there on the streets, and in many ways
[Guest]: also coming together. And then of course, when we thought it was all over, we were hit
[Guest]: by the second wave. And second wave just left us with a collective trauma that will take
[Guest]: years to process. And I think that it has, it has touched all of us in terms of the kind
[Guest]: of choices that we've been making, in terms of what it's doing to the way we work, the
[Guest]: way we look at our relationships, the way we are connected to the generation before
[Guest]: us and the one next to us. I think it's shaping us in many ways. So for me, it's been extremely
[Guest]: significant. I, like many other people, had not had so much time to be at home ever before,
[Guest]: to be stuck with each other, in the way that we were, to be able to understand the good
[Guest]: and the bad and the ugly of it also. But at the same time, it slowed us down, to some
[Guest]: extent, the tragedies, the deaths, the hunger, all of that. I hope that we stay with this
[Guest]: time a little longer. And don't just kind of erase it all and try to get back to a normal
[Guest]: life. I don't think that normal is ever going to come back.
[Amit Varma]: So there's a weird thing that's been happening to me in the last few days, which could be
[Amit Varma]: an interesting metaphor for this, where, you know, I'm here in Delhi recording 12 episodes
[Amit Varma]: in 12 days is kind of a foolhardy venture. Yours is the 10th, I've done nine before this.
[Amit Varma]: And the average runtime has been four and a half to five hours. There's been one which
[Amit Varma]: went to six hours. And during these episodes sitting exactly as we are now, this weird
[Amit Varma]: thing would happen in the second half of some of the recordings, where I felt as if the
[Amit Varma]: face of the guest has changed, where I would see something else than what it was earlier.
[Amit Varma]: And I would wonder that, why is this person looking so different? And you know that if
[Amit Varma]: I met them outside, would I now recognize them? And sometimes I'd feel that I wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: recognize them at all. Or sometimes I'd feel that I was seeing the wrong thing earlier.
[Amit Varma]: And it's really purely a visual sort of illusion, where the quality of the face just seems like
[Amit Varma]: someone else like, you know, I did an episode with Mahima Vashisht, a friend of mine, and
[Amit Varma]: at one point, her face suddenly started looking just like Pallavi Joshi's and I was, and she
[Amit Varma]: doesn't look like that. And I was wondering what kind of optical illusion is this and
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode with Pratap Bhanu Mehta. And his face seemed to sort of become softer
[Amit Varma]: and gentler and which of course goes with the person that he is, he's a very soft and
[Amit Varma]: gentle person. But it just had this sort of different quality to it. And I'm speaking
[Amit Varma]: at an optical level. But I'm just wondering thinking aloud, that when you're at home,
[Amit Varma]: and you're forced to spend time with all of these people, and you know them so well, right,
[Amit Varma]: they are your family, you know them so well. Are there moments where it feels like you're
[Amit Varma]: looking at something else? Are there moments where you feel like you've seen something
[Amit Varma]: you haven't seen before? That I mean, at one level, there is that sense that we are always
[Amit Varma]: destined to be strangers to one another, we figure out little parts of the puzzle now
[Amit Varma]: and then. And that gives us the illusion of knowing the other, but we never truly can.
[Amit Varma]: But was there any of that because of the enforced physical closeness that happened in these
[Guest]: months?
[Guest]: I would say that, particularly within the family, we surprised each other. You know,
[Guest]: it had been a really hectic time before the lockdown was announced. I'd been very busy
[Guest]: with the Karwane Mohabbat campaign, we were travelling, we were making films, the anti-CIA
[Guest]: protests had, you know, we had participated in them rather robustly in Delhi, travelling
[Guest]: with them, then the Delhi violence had happened, we were involved in rehabilitation. And suddenly,
[Guest]: you know, we're setting up refugee camps, and the next day, lockdown. So my children
[Guest]: had not seen me at home for a long time. I'd been very busy. And now I was home all the
[Guest]: time, except that because of the huge hunger crisis, and because of the way that people
[Guest]: were on the streets without any food, people had also started connecting with each other
[Guest]: and mobilising the distribution of food. And I found that I was now working very feverishly,
[Guest]: but from home. And I thought I was doing my children a favour. I, you know, I was, I thought,
[Guest]: you know, I'm there. And they were like, it took a while, it took a while. But my oldest
[Guest]: daughter, she called me out. She said, you're not there at all. We miss you. You know, and
[Guest]: I realised that I didn't know how to be at home. That we had to, you know, we had to
[Guest]: then, we stumbled upon things, a group of cats came to our house, we began to take care
[Guest]: of them. One had babies, we began to take care of those. And somehow, my life with my
[Guest]: daughters began to centre around the cats and dogs that we had begun to feed. Nurturing
[Guest]: them nurtured us. My husband was stuck. He was at home in his village with his father.
[Guest]: And in the beginning, we were really relieved that he was stuck there, because we would
[Guest]: have been so worried about his 90 year old father being alone. But it was more than a
[Guest]: month before we saw each other again. And these had been months where we had suddenly
[Guest]: seen too much of life, we had seen things that we were not quite sure how to how to
[Guest]: process, there was so much fear and panic around us. I think we were also a little bit
[Guest]: in denial. We were, you know, all the breads that were being baked and the pasta that was
[Guest]: being eaten. We kind of tried to keep it light and celebratory. But there was a sense of
[Guest]: panic about what was going to happen to the world. I mean, countries had gone into lockdown.
[Guest]: The news was bad every day. So when I had that experience, quite literally when my husband
[Guest]: came back home, and now he had come via road through many districts, so he was exposed.
[Guest]: You know, we had to isolate him according to those times, the norms of those times.
[Guest]: And we were looking, we were looking at each other as if we were not quite sure who the
[Guest]: other person was. I mean, I remember evening after evening, I'm sitting just outside the
[Guest]: door and eating while he's eating on his bed. And he's telling his friends, I'm spending
[Guest]: more time with my wife than I've ever spent while I'm isolating in the house. So it did
[Guest]: bring out different sides of us. And I'm not surprised you're having this experience in
[Guest]: these long conversations, because at some point, our masks fall. And, and our faces
[Guest]: do change. You know, at some point, we are not in a safe environment, we're not so cautious
[Guest]: anymore. And then we have to kind of recognize each other in a new way. And I think, but
[Guest]: I did experience that, particularly with my growing children. In my head, they were much
[Guest]: younger than they they had become, they had to knock it into my head that, you know, that
[Guest]: I needed to have different expectations from them. And they had different expectations
[Guest]: from me.
[Amit Varma]: And often, we have a mask, not just for the world, but also for ourselves. We're always
[Amit Varma]: sort of there's a persona we've built up even for ourselves. And sometimes there's a crack,
[Amit Varma]: and the light slips through as it were, that's something that you more than anyone else,
[Amit Varma]: you've always been examining that through all your writing and your personal essays
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. But during this time, were there moments like that? And what are they
[Amit Varma]: like where when you see yourself through somebody else's eyes, and you see something that you
[Amit Varma]: know is true, but you were just ignoring it. So, you know,
[Guest]: you know, I, I really feel that it's a privilege to be surrounded by people to know people
[Guest]: who will call you out. It really is a privilege. And my daughter at one point said to me, every
[Guest]: time I talk to you about something I'm feeling you make it about yourself. And I was like,
[Guest]: whoa, now this is what I know not to do. And yet, if she's saying it, she's feeling it.
[Guest]: And I wondered what I was doing. And, and I realized I, you know, when I'm when I'm
[Guest]: nervous with my own child, I have no tools. And I quickly begin to tell her my story or
[Guest]: I quickly begin to tell her what I had done in this time of my life. And her context was
[Guest]: completely different. And she had to tell me that. I would, I wouldn't imagine that
[Guest]: I would make that mistake. I wouldn't imagine that I with all my awareness, and you know,
[Guest]: all my reading on mental health and all my work in the field would need to do that. But
[Guest]: she did. And it's, it's really quite beautiful, because it slows you down, it stops you in
[Guest]: your tracks. In the in the middle of 2020, I had stopped writing the column for Mint
[Guest]: Lounge. And also, I'd not been writing so much about parenting or children because they
[Guest]: were in their middle teens. And we were kind of reassessing things. But Kartika VK from
[Guest]: Westland, she called me and she said, we'd like to commission essays. And I want you
[Guest]: to write two essays on parenting. And in the middle of, you know, just this post lockdown
[Guest]: world, where mobility is still quite strapped, I had to write this essay. And this is what
[Guest]: these were the conversations I was having with my daughter. And it was a moment of reckoning,
[Guest]: it was a moment of recognizing that they are actually much older, much more mature, and
[Guest]: very different from where I have frozen them in my imagination. And and of course, all
[Guest]: of those moments in relationships will be like hiccups. They do sometimes momentarily
[Guest]: feel like failures. But that's because we also build up expectations from relationships
[Guest]: to such an extent. And yeah, I mean, similarly, I think many couples also went through this
[Guest]: where it was such a different way of being married that you were in the same space all
[Guest]: the time that you had to kind of wonder if you would marry him. Now, you know, if you
[Guest]: had a choice, would you still choose each other now that you were looking at each other
[Guest]: so closely, so many years into your original marriage. And I think it was a gift in some
[Guest]: ways to reassess, to decide to change your patterns, if you'd like.
[Amit Varma]: And when you talk about it as a privilege and a gift, and that is so true. And it's
[Amit Varma]: also rare, because one thing that I observe more and more around me is that people kind
[Amit Varma]: of get stuck in the grooves that they are in, whether it is of their work or whether
[Amit Varma]: it is in their relationships. So you adopt a particular role, which may more or less
[Amit Varma]: conform to the social expectation, or it may not, or it could be whatever. But you get
[Amit Varma]: stuck in those grooves. And the other person becomes a fixed point in your head, a fixed
[Amit Varma]: thing in your head, like you, you mentioned that in you, you know, your kids were frozen
[Amit Varma]: in your imagination till you kind of snapped out of it. And then we go along those grooves,
[Amit Varma]: and being completely alone, because you're just in those grooves. Other people are sort
[Amit Varma]: of instrumental to you, they're performing roles in your life, and you're performing
[Amit Varma]: roles in their lives. But you're never really coming out and taking that moment and stopping
[Amit Varma]: and kind of talking which can be so valuable. And it seems that your act of spending all
[Amit Varma]: these years writing your column writing about all of this is something that therefore within
[Amit Varma]: your family kind of make sure that everybody, all of you never really get trapped in those
[Amit Varma]: grooves. Because there's always that examination, there's always on the part of everyone else
[Amit Varma]: awareness that you're watching them, ki hum toh content ban gayi, I suppose might well
[Amit Varma]: be a legitimate complaint. But I guess the sort of that self aware gaze you bring to
[Amit Varma]: yourself and the family where you take a step out, everyone, I guess would kind of be forced
[Amit Varma]: to do that. And I agree that it's a blessing. But do you think that we are sort of wired
[Amit Varma]: to actually just be in grooves because life is easier. You know, you don't always have
[Amit Varma]: to reevaluate stuff. You don't have to work at relationships, right? You don't have to
[Amit Varma]: face deep truths about yourself. If a daughter tells you you're making everything about yourself,
[Amit Varma]: instead of having to think about it, you can just snap back and say just finish your homework,
[Amit Varma]: you know. And I think most people are in those kind of grooves. And I think that is natural
[Amit Varma]: to us. And, and I'm just thinking aloud, it seems to me that that's a great human and
[Amit Varma]: social tragedy. What are your sort of thoughts on that?
[Guest]: I would definitely second you on using the word tragedy. I don't know whether we are
[Guest]: wired or not. I don't think we're wired. We would not have, you know, such a large scale
[Guest]: mental health, unspoken, unacknowledged mental health crisis in every family, literally in
[Guest]: every family, in every workplace, in every school space, every institution that we are
[Guest]: connected to. And in a way, the pandemic has exacerbated all of this. You know, there was
[Guest]: a lot that we were kind of pretending that things in the groove are fine. It's those
[Guest]: who are not fitting in with that pace. They need some fixing and we've got some. And we
[Guest]: are finding that more and more people are not coping. They're not coping with coming
[Guest]: back. They're not coping with being at home. They're not coping with each other. And I
[Guest]: think that we do not, we do not name the estrangement that we feel and that we do experience it.
[Guest]: You have a safe personal conversation with anybody. And one after the other stories begin
[Guest]: to come out. And now, I think more so in the post 2020, we are able to call it anxiety,
[Guest]: call it panic, call it depression, you know, rather than just, I'm in a low phase or I'm,
[Guest]: you know, I'm just going through tough times or something like that. It is because we insist
[Guest]: on the grooves, that it doesn't work for us. And I mean, I'm doing these, you know, just
[Guest]: like that, Amit, I started the memoir workshops. I announced the first one, with the help of
[Guest]: Arpita of Yoda Press. And last year, November, December, we did the first one. And it's just
[Guest]: been so popular. And so much, you know, there's such a waiting list that I'm now concluding
[Guest]: the seventh of the workshops in eight months. And what are the, I mean, first of all, I
[Guest]: had no idea that that many people wanted to write their own stories, wanted a place where
[Guest]: they could tell their own stories. And when they do begin to tell their stories, we're
[Guest]: all telling the same stories. We're all remembering the grandmother who died unacknowledged, who
[Guest]: kept the family together, whose mental health was not taken care of, or, you know, the young
[Guest]: people in the family who have specific needs that schooling ignores, that makes you put
[Guest]: labels on them, but you recognize that actually, you're just wasting a beautiful life by not
[Guest]: acknowledging their special needs. So I feel that it's actually a disaster. It's a tragedy
[Guest]: that we have believed in the grooves. And this whole collapse of governance, collapse
[Guest]: of education, collapse of workplace ethic is taking place, because it never worked.
[Guest]: And a little maladjustment, a little push, and it just seems to have all come apart.
[Guest]: And we hear so much now about young people don't want to work, young people have attitude.
[Guest]: And I think that what they're showing us is that they do not accept the systems that we
[Guest]: have normalized. They, you know, they have the, for the first time, many of them have
[Guest]: the privilege to make choices, and they're choosing to do that. And we need to read the
[Guest]: writing on the wall, in most cases.
[Amit Varma]: Well said. And just speaking of the hunger for learning and the hunger for writing, like
[Amit Varma]: for my writing course, which I started when COVID started, really, I've had some 1900
[Amit Varma]: students so far, and perhaps it'll go to 2000 by the time the episode airs. And there is
[Amit Varma]: sort of that hunger. And, you know, I think a lot of stereotypes about young people come
[Amit Varma]: about because you only see Sri Lankan young people on Twitter. But from the wider interactions
[Amit Varma]: that I've had, you know, I would say that any stereotype I would come up with for young
[Amit Varma]: people is overwhelmingly positive, you know, much more aware, much more self aware, they
[Amit Varma]: work much harder. There's, you know, so you can't kind of look at one particular breed
[Amit Varma]: and kind of judge, I want to sort of double click on what you spoke about the explosion
[Amit Varma]: in mental health issues, which we don't recognise, you know, whether it is in the home or in
[Amit Varma]: the workplace or in the schools or whatever, because this is not spoken of, right? The
[Amit Varma]: common impression indeed is that I mean, I've even heard people say that, hey, this is just
[Amit Varma]: young people whining, they're making too much of whatever all of that nonsense. But if you
[Amit Varma]: even look at basic statistics, like one of my previous guests this week, I think Samad
[Amit Varma]: Bansal was talking about the rising rate of suicides among housewives, for example, that's
[Amit Varma]: just one indicator. And, and those are very blunt tools, those kind of stats, but they
[Amit Varma]: clearly is a problem. And it clearly is, you know, its roots lie somewhere within our modern
[Amit Varma]: society in a sense. So can you elaborate on that? What is the extent of the problem? How
[Amit Varma]: did you discover that, you know, this is happening? And, you know, what do you think of what can
[Amit Varma]: be done about it? What are the things that make it worse, and so on and so forth?
[Guest]: I think, and I'm speaking simply from observation, from constantly reading about it, from reading,
[Guest]: you know, new papers in psychology and psychiatry, and from following, practicing psychotherapists.
[Guest]: In a way, it's my it's my special interest. I've kind of been reading about mental health
[Guest]: since I was a child. And I feel very strongly that I would say that there are as many mental
[Guest]: health issues as there are physical health issues. You know, we, we have so many hospitals,
[Guest]: and we have so many doctors, and we have this one small department of psychiatry, we'll
[Guest]: have one psychologist in 10 neighborhoods, when we will have 10 doctors in one neighborhood.
[Guest]: And we are seeing a growing awareness, we are seeing that schools and offices and particularly
[Guest]: universities are creating, you know, whole departments and counseling centers where people
[Guest]: can go and seek help. But what we are not changing enough is the conversation around
[Guest]: it. We are continuing to see somebody whose, you know, mental health may be flaring up
[Guest]: to the point that they don't seem to be normal anymore, or they don't seem to be functioning
[Guest]: anymore. It's only those people who are being isolated and, and we're trying to fix them
[Guest]: in some way. Just from, you know, my experience of being in school, so I was in what was at
[Guest]: that time the most popular, the most sought after school brand in Delhi, Delhi Public
[Guest]: School, RK Puram. There was a, there were very bright kids. I mean, first of all, there
[Guest]: were too many kids, we were like in the 1000s, they were in class 12, we were 12 sections,
[Guest]: and now there are 24 or even more sections in that school. So it's a factory, it's a
[Guest]: huge schooling factory. So there was a lot of really good teaching. But there was also
[Guest]: a lot of very abusive teaching. There were very smart kids who were doing very well.
[Guest]: There was a lot of violence, there was a lot of bullying, there was a lot of fun, also.
[Guest]: But within all of that, there was still some kind of support system that that held that
[Guest]: held us through that took us through. When my children have been through schooling, I
[Guest]: did realize as soon as my first child was ready for school that I nearly had a kind
[Guest]: of a galloping sense of panic in me. Because I hadn't thought about everything that was
[Guest]: not okay with school, but it had stayed in my body. And I had this huge sense of what
[Guest]: not to do, but not necessarily what one could choose from. So anyway, we thought we were
[Guest]: really aware and we were making very, very careful choices. We moved out of the city,
[Guest]: we went to a quiet neighborhood, we chose a small school, we made choices, we remained
[Guest]: flexible about it, trying to get the best that we could. But my children's experience
[Guest]: of school, the kind of bullying that they report, the kind of Islamophobia that they
[Guest]: report, the kind of skewed gender, you know, behavior and preferential treatment that they
[Guest]: continue to report in the 21st century in the finest, most expensive schools of India,
[Guest]: you know. And also the kind of self-harm that children are doing in literally every classroom.
[Guest]: So from talking to young people, they are reporting a distress level in themselves and
[Guest]: in their peers of a magnitude that schools are not equipped to deal with. And, you know,
[Guest]: because we've been very invested in this, you know, I have three children in school.
[Guest]: I had them in school till about three years ago. We've been talking to the best educators,
[Guest]: you know. And finally, when my children quit school three years ago, this very, very fine
[Guest]: elderly principal of the school, she looked at the child, she looked at us, she knew us.
[Guest]: She said, you're doing the best thing that you can. We cannot fix the problem. We know
[Guest]: it exists, but we cannot fix the problem. So protect your child from it if your child
[Guest]: is reporting this as a problem. And she actually gave me the names of unschoolers and, you
[Guest]: know, other people and, you know, sent us off with her blessings. So I'm talking about
[Guest]: a level of awareness that is there, but a lack of tools, a lack of holistic kind of
[Guest]: reactiveness from institutions about how to, you know, how to fix it, how to acknowledge
[Guest]: that it's actually really quite bad. And in a way to acknowledge it, Amit, we will have
[Guest]: to, we will have to re-examine hierarchies. We will have to re-look at how do we talk
[Guest]: to men in power? How do we empower women in the workplace? Because all of that is playing
[Guest]: out in the school as well. And that then becomes a much larger conversation.
[Amit Varma]: So lots to double click on. And I'll begin with what this lady told you, we cannot fix
[Amit Varma]: a problem. What is the problem? What was she referring to? Can you like dig a little deeper?
[Guest]: So let's say we're talking about a twelve and a half year old who's in grade seven.
[Guest]: And in the same year, she's gone on a school trip. And while the company that has taken
[Guest]: them has been completely wetted, they've made these fancy presentations to the school, to
[Guest]: the parents, all the safety gear has been taken care of, you know, all the overtly everything
[Guest]: is supposed to be safe for your child. But what is her experience, you know, when when
[Guest]: a group of boys and girls are without a structure suddenly out there in the mountains staying
[Guest]: in tents? There are coaches who are talking in a certain way to the young women. They're
[Guest]: referring to them as you're my princess. You don't have to run. I'll save you from this.
[Guest]: Now here's a very athletic girl. She wants to run. She's faster than the boys. She also
[Guest]: wants to get the medal. But suddenly, you know, young girls are being singled out. They're
[Guest]: being sexualized in a way that they don't have a language to call out yet. But there
[Guest]: are also women teachers. They can see it, but they don't know how to address it either.
[Guest]: So they come back. All the children talk to their parents. The parents are up in arms.
[Guest]: I literally had to quit the WhatsApp group at that time because it was on fire. And I
[Guest]: was like, this is not going to help. We are just screaming our heads off. So we try to
[Guest]: address it with the school. We know it's a problem. Yes, we're talking to them. I can't
[Guest]: believe this happened. I mean, you know, we don't really have the training, the system,
[Guest]: the wherewithal to address it. You've got football for girls, but you've got a coach
[Guest]: who decides, oh, there are only three or four girls. Let them play with younger boys. You've
[Guest]: got younger boys. So like, why should we play with girls? But so all of this, I mean, it's
[Guest]: common gender socializing playing out in the play field. But people in authority do not
[Guest]: know or do not care to address it. So how is, you know, an average Indian girl who knows
[Guest]: about equality, who knows about justice? She doesn't have to read it anywhere. She knows
[Guest]: her capabilities. But suddenly she's in a world, which has been her safe world, that
[Guest]: is diminishing her because she's a girl and at multiple levels. So, you know, teachers
[Guest]: don't know how to deal with the bullying and aggression in the classroom. They really,
[Guest]: they look at some of the more aggressive children, they could be girls or boys, and they don't
[Guest]: know how to address this. So we're always telling the sensitive kid, don't take it to
[Guest]: heart. Don't sit with him. You know, we're always trying to fix the one who doesn't need
[Guest]: fixing. And so I escalate to the class teacher, we escalate to the teacher above that we finally
[Guest]: go to the principal. And they don't know what to do. And I'm not blaming them. Because it's
[Guest]: it's really, I mean, at the same time playing out everywhere, isn't it? I mean, we had the
[Guest]: Me Too movement blowing up right after that. And look at the extent of the filth that came
[Guest]: out. And that was just the tip of the iceberg. Look at the backlash against the women who
[Guest]: spoke up and the kind of cases they are still continuing to fight. You know, we're seeing
[Guest]: what's happened in the West as well as in India. So the world is much slower to change
[Guest]: and much more resistant and the kind of literally the backlash that people are having to live
[Guest]: with is problematic. It's the same thing if you belong to a minority, you're just going
[Guest]: to have to swallow your humiliation on a daily basis. Because we don't know how to question
[Guest]: those in authority. And somewhere we have to begin to chip at it. You know, those of
[Guest]: us who feel strongly about it, we have to take the risks and find ways to creative ways,
[Guest]: not necessarily ways that put us in danger. Through storytelling, through filmmaking,
[Guest]: through solidarities with those who are risking more than we are. Things need to happen. And
[Guest]: in a way, our schools and our workplace institutions are aligning more and more with those in authority
[Guest]: who have fascist tendencies, who want to take the world back into a much more patriarchal,
[Guest]: you know, set up. So instead of kind of going forward as we thought the world would go,
[Guest]: it really wasn't in my immature imagination that we would be dealing with this kind of
[Guest]: regression in the social and political space. And that's affecting families as well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I agree. We all, you know, I grew up thinking the arc of history will bend
[Amit Varma]: towards a good place, you know, more freedom, more justice, more whatever. And the last
[Amit Varma]: few years kind of make you question that and make you question whether you build that narrative
[Amit Varma]: based on a really small sample size, you know, there are so only so many years that we have
[Amit Varma]: actually, you know, should we make assumptions about the future from that? I'll continue
[Amit Varma]: digging into this subject in the sense that you've spoken about what's going wrong at
[Amit Varma]: the school. And that's, of course, a reflection of what is already wrong in society in terms
[Amit Varma]: of the perpetuation of these structures and these grooves, as it were. Let's broaden it
[Amit Varma]: a little bit and talk about beyond the school, just society and the way kids grow up today
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that Jonathan Haidt once pointed out how the mental health problems among teenage
[Amit Varma]: girls specifically over the last 10 years and the point that he was making is that it
[Amit Varma]: was more a problem with girls and with boys. You know, once upon a time, people used to
[Amit Varma]: worry that boys are playing too many video games, and they'll become violent and they'll
[Amit Varma]: become this. But it didn't really make much of a difference. If anything, it helped boys
[Amit Varma]: with problem solving and all of that. But with girls, what social media did was it put
[Amit Varma]: them in this competitive performative space, where, you know, a generation of girls earlier,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps when you grew up, you'll have girls just talking to each other about normal things
[Amit Varma]: and chilling out and being themselves building their own little safe spaces, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: But the contention runs that because of social media, because of what Instagram has become
[Amit Varma]: and Instagram shows the best version of everyone, right, the version they want to put out, and
[Amit Varma]: your real self has to compete with the imagined self of everybody else. And that leads to
[Amit Varma]: enormous amounts of pressure, enormous amounts of anxiety, and that whole classic anxiety
[Amit Varma]: of somehow fitting into a world which is really a world of, you know, imagined and constructed
[Amit Varma]: selves can be a huge problem. And I think Facebook many years ago suppressed a study
[Amit Varma]: which showed that teenage suicide rates among girls were rising, and it was partly because
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, social media and FB itself in a sense. So what's your observation on this?
[Amit Varma]: Because the challenges of girls growing up today at the time your daughters are, are,
[Amit Varma]: in some ways, you have the same damn issues that you did when you were a kid, the patriarchy
[Amit Varma]: and the fixed roles, they have to move on and the condescension and all of that. But
[Amit Varma]: there are also these newer, tougher challenges.
[Guest]: I absolutely agree with you, there are newer, tougher challenges. I'm also happy to report
[Guest]: that in my observation, these are newer, tougher, smarter girls. And I see a lot of them resisting
[Guest]: the pressure as well. But the fact that the pressure exists, the fact that if you fit
[Guest]: in, you're, you're masking to the extent that you are no longer in touch with your authentic
[Guest]: self. If you don't fit in, you are not sure whether you're doing the right thing, you're
[Guest]: too young, you're too young to be able to feel okay. Despite the fact that, you know,
[Guest]: you are skipping out on the parties and not dressed the way the others are not being able
[Guest]: to talk the other ways, the others or don't want to behave in the way that your peers
[Guest]: may be. And I really saw this conundrum play out in my family. I really did. When we shifted
[Guest]: from a neighborhood school, to a much bigger school, closer to the city, you know, we thought
[Guest]: we were choosing a more liberal education, a more liberal education institution. But
[Guest]: who are the children and the families who are coming to these schools, we are all consuming
[Guest]: the same shallow media, whether it is social media, mainstream media, you know, all the
[Guest]: stuff that's coming in through our phones, and on our OTT channels. And because in many
[Guest]: ways, you know, we are the first and second generations that are experiencing this, I
[Guest]: do feel that many of us are completely overwhelmed, overwhelmed with choices. So I, you know,
[Guest]: I even wrote this article that was, in many ways, a little viral, but also very contentious,
[Guest]: where I wrote about raising our three children in a home without television and keeping mainstream
[Guest]: media entirely out of our home, there were no screens for them, till they had all crossed
[Guest]: the age of 12. And, you know, and everybody was like, but how can you and you're depriving
[Guest]: them and how dare you and stuff like that. But so when they were very little, we didn't
[Guest]: have anything streaming, we watched films, but we chose what we would watch, we would
[Guest]: get a DVD, watch it. And then when they kind of began to, you know, they crossed adolescence,
[Guest]: they began to have access to the internet, and they began to make those choices. And
[Guest]: they also moved to a big school where they came, you know, where they were surrounded
[Guest]: by children who were literally staying up all night watching American series and coming
[Guest]: into school and talking about them the next day. They were wired enough to be able to
[Guest]: do that. My observation is that because they had grown up without it being normal to constantly
[Guest]: have things unfiltered be playing around you because they had taken, you know, been through
[Guest]: a slowish process where we were making active choices of what we want and what we don't
[Guest]: want. They, they did feel a dissonance when they came into a world where you were supposed
[Guest]: to know things, not because they were good, but because they were the popular choice of
[Guest]: the time, because that's what was trending. And so our middle daughter, who's the first
[Guest]: child who really alerted an alarm, you know, raise the alarm, in a sense, I'm just going
[Guest]: to narrate this incident as an as an example. She's been in this new school for for a year,
[Guest]: and we went to attend a wedding and it was in a very fancy hotel in Delhi, not a place
[Guest]: that we often go to. And just these two older daughters of mine, they they began to suddenly
[Guest]: put a lot of distance between themselves and us they were walking far much further away.
[Guest]: And my husband calls out to them and says, Why are you walking so far away, walk with
[Guest]: us. And she turns around and says, I don't want to be seen with you. And he's like, what?
[Guest]: And she just turned to me and she said, That's how children in my school talk. Now either
[Guest]: I can be like them, or I can be like you. Give me a choice. And it was it was like,
[Guest]: really, it's a moment that stayed with me. In her own way, she's articulating that either
[Guest]: I can be cool like them, or I can be this slow, small town family on the, you know,
[Guest]: corner of Delhi, like you give, I can't belong to both, I'm confused. And I mean, the fact
[Guest]: that she could say it, the fact that I could hear it, the fact that we could process it
[Guest]: helped us to make, you know, to finally make the choice to actually keep the internet and
[Guest]: let the school go, you know, to, to, to say no to all the extra pressures that came with
[Guest]: mainstream schooling. And it's not made life easier for my children. I'm not saying we've
[Guest]: got a magic key that, you know, that has that works. It's a longish process, we're learning
[Guest]: on the go, and and so are they. But at least they are able to see something toxic and say,
[Guest]: I don't have to participate in this. You know, even if it means that I am going to be isolated,
[Guest]: or I'm not going to have the same friend circle in the same network. And it sure it, it also
[Guest]: triggers a kind of anxiety in them. But but at least they're able to make informed choices.
[Guest]: I'm not sure I answered your question.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, questions aren't meant to really even be answered. They're just meant to lead
[Amit Varma]: to things and lead here and there and all of that, which is always the way it should
[Amit Varma]: go. And you did kind of answer my question, I guess. I mean, in terms of at least how
[Amit Varma]: you guys have fought in your own way to, you know, protect your kids from that and get
[Amit Varma]: them out of that kind of toxic situations. And you are, of course, unschooling your kids,
[Amit Varma]: which is fascinating to me. So I want to dig in a little bit into that, in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: as we were speaking before, you know, the recording, I've always sort of believed that
[Amit Varma]: the just the way that we think about schooling is fundamentally wrong and broken. This current
[Amit Varma]: system was designed in the early 19th century, to turn out workers for the Industrial Revolution.
[Amit Varma]: So you have, you know, kids of the same age studying together studying the same bunch
[Amit Varma]: of subjects, everything proceeds in a particular way. And it was perhaps okay for that time
[Amit Varma]: and for that purpose. And even that can be argued. But today, it doesn't seem to really
[Amit Varma]: do anything for the kids, you know, a lot of their education really comes from outside
[Amit Varma]: either through living life or through the internet, or a lot of the useful things they
[Amit Varma]: learn come from outside, there is a lot of toxicity even within schools as well. And,
[Amit Varma]: and in a sense, the real purpose of a school in society is as a daycare center, where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the parents are doing whatever they're doing, and the kids have to be there somewhere
[Amit Varma]: for the whole day. And so schools are a purpose for that, you know, education is just sort
[Amit Varma]: of the mask we put on it. And that also indicates that if schools are daycare centers, that
[Amit Varma]: most parents don't, they've had the kid, but they don't want to be involved beyond a point,
[Amit Varma]: right? It's too much for them, the pressure and all of that, that, you know, comes along
[Amit Varma]: with that, you know, so when you look at the schooling system, when did you start, you
[Amit Varma]: know, thinking about how flawed and how broken it is, and you've described some of the ways
[Amit Varma]: in which it is broken. And then when you began to think of alternatives for your own kids,
[Amit Varma]: you know, like I imagine, initially, there must have been the sense of fear, this great
[Amit Varma]: unknown that if they don't go to that particular setup, that structure that has been set, you
[Amit Varma]: know, what will it do in terms of socializing? What will it do in terms of whatever they
[Amit Varma]: have to do later in life in terms of college and education and credentials and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So take me through your processes of, you know, how you're thinking on this evolved
[Amit Varma]: right from the start, where you started saying that, no, this is wrong, to the point where
[Amit Varma]: you said that I am taking my daughters out of this and so on.
[Guest]: I used to say, I, when I finally came out of my own school, I was, in many ways full
[Guest]: of rage for the system that marginalized a majority of the children in every class. Literally,
[Guest]: you know, you have a class of 50 and 10 are managing, 20 are floating in their own way
[Guest]: and 20 are just miserable. And I did well in school. I participated in everything. But
[Guest]: I remember coming out of there and saying, you know, it made me by breaking me. I had
[Guest]: something like that in my head. And, and I developed a very, I was very young for these
[Guest]: kind of thoughts. But in retrospect, I can see that I had, you know, the whole the big
[Guest]: deal about my school was that it was the brand, the name of the school, because it was supposed
[Guest]: to be good, you had to be in it. And it didn't feel good. I'd gone from a small school that
[Guest]: felt like heaven. And, and this felt like hell, really. So when I had to choose a college,
[Guest]: I said, I'm not going to go, I'm not going to, I'm not going to go for the brands. And
[Guest]: you came out of school like mine, with the kind of marks we had, you could go to Stephens
[Guest]: if you wanted to, you could certainly go to Hindu. And I, and I went to Indraprasth College.
[Guest]: I consciously decided not to go to LSR, and not to go to Stephens, and to go to IP, which
[Guest]: was famously called the Bhenji College of that time. And in IP, it was such a novelty
[Guest]: to see a DPS RKP kid come in that people came to see me. She's the one who because there
[Guest]: was only one of one person from my school who had gone to that. But I chose to study
[Guest]: psychology. And because, you know, I had kind of figured out what I needed, and what I didn't
[Guest]: need. I couldn't articulate it like that. But I can look back and, and, and kind of
[Guest]: tell that. So when, when our first child, Seher was born, I was the idea of homeschooling
[Guest]: is something that was in my head. But I didn't know whether I could do it. I didn't have
[Guest]: the confidence. I didn't know how to do it. I wasn't connected to anyone else. And we
[Guest]: were too early in our marriage to know, you know, where we where we stood on very important
[Guest]: topics like this. And also, we come from very different backgrounds. So my, my husband's
[Guest]: favorite line in every school admission would be, it doesn't matter to me whether you take
[Guest]: my kid or not, I can always put her in the village school, I went to the village school,
[Guest]: I turned out fine. You know, I'm not intimidated by the big city. And he would drop this line.
[Guest]: And everybody would kind of want to take his kid because I mean, there was one interview
[Guest]: in which they looked at me and said, Where did you find him? I'm glad you're impressed.
[Guest]: So so I did, I was thinking about homeschooling. At that time, I was also thinking about, I
[Guest]: had friends who were running, who were running a school for tribal children in a village
[Guest]: in Madhya Pradesh and raising their own children there. And we took our little children and
[Guest]: went there with the idea that maybe we can live there. But my husband and I looked at
[Guest]: each other from a distance and said, I don't think we can live with each other over here.
[Guest]: This is, this is, you know, it would have, we were not ready for that. So they did go
[Guest]: to school in the way and I, and I remember, I was just reading on my phone, there's a
[Guest]: note that my daughter's written in 2015, in which she's made a list of ways in which our
[Guest]: family is different from other families. And the top thing she's written is, our parents
[Guest]: say go out and play. Don't, you don't have to study. Other parents say study, study,
[Guest]: study. So, so we were, I guess, in a, that was the message we were trying to give them
[Guest]: that you don't have to take anything too seriously. If you don't want to go, you don't have to
[Guest]: go. This is not something that we are going to internalize as this great hierarchical
[Guest]: thing that we have to kowtow to. But yeah, and I, you know, when I began to write my
[Guest]: column, I know school used to turn up, the subject of schooling used to turn up consistently.
[Guest]: Coincidence or not, Amit, literally 2014 onwards, schools have changed. The manner in which,
[Guest]: you know, those in authority in school speak, the manner in which they lay down rules, in
[Guest]: which they marginalize some holidays versus other holidays, you know, it's very much like
[Guest]: the governance of this country, where you can just lay down a rule, no questions asked
[Guest]: and karna hai toh karo, varna, you can, you know, find your own way. So, that has changed.
[Guest]: It was more participative before. And yeah, to answer your question, we came to a point
[Guest]: where we felt that we had tried every option that was available to us from alternate schooling,
[Guest]: from slow schooling, from very involved participatory, you know, schooling in which we were volunteering
[Guest]: in the schools, everything. And I guess because the children were older, because we were older
[Guest]: as a couple, we then began to connect with community of unschoolers and homeschoolers
[Guest]: in this country, which is a fairly decent number of people spread across and many, many
[Guest]: people who were much older than us, who'd been doing, you know, making these choices
[Guest]: for decades. So, we had examples of people who we could meet, there's Manish Jain and
[Guest]: this organization in Udaipur, there is Swaraj University that's also in Udaipur, then we
[Guest]: met Claude Alvarez from Goa, he's a passionate speaker about unschooling, we met many families
[Guest]: from Pune and Bangalore and Chennai. And, and we found, so we found a tribe, in a sense,
[Guest]: you know, here are people like us from disparate backgrounds, who've tried things, who have
[Guest]: made choices. And here are these wonderful young people, older than our kids, or the
[Guest]: same age as our kids who are doing very well. So, I guess we had matured as parents, and
[Guest]: it became an emergency literally for the children. So, when we offered them the choice, two of
[Guest]: them took it. The younger was in a slower Waldorf school, she said, I like my school.
[Guest]: Two years later, she said, I think they've forgotten how to be Waldorf. So, I'm coming
[Guest]: home. And she came back. And being connected with other families like us, that's been,
[Guest]: that's been amazing. It's been an amazing journey. So, not a week goes by where we are
[Guest]: not in some way, either speaking to a younger family, who is considering not sending their
[Guest]: children to school or speaking to an older family or our own peers, and discussing all
[Guest]: the options. And because we are also in this prime of the internet age in some way, there
[Guest]: are, there are just so many options that you can choose. So long as you've got some confidence
[Guest]: in yourself, you know, and you also need the confidence to make mistakes. You know, you're
[Guest]: not just handing over to a brand name and saying, you know, when they come out of that
[Guest]: side of the pipe, they should be employable or something like that. So you're okay.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll go back to something you mentioned about your own experience in school, where
[Amit Varma]: you said that you were full of rage, that, you know, if you had a class of 50 people,
[Amit Varma]: you'd have 10, who would be perfectly fine, 20, who would float along, and 20, who would
[Amit Varma]: be miserable. So can you drill down on that a bit and talk about that experience? And
[Amit Varma]: why the rage and why the misery? Because, like, when I think back on my schooling years,
[Amit Varma]: I hated school. But a lot of my angst was a typical angst that teenage boys will feel
[Amit Varma]: the whole rebel without a cause thing. One of my songs that kind of defines that period
[Amit Varma]: for me was unsatisfied by the replacements. I link it from the show notes. That was exactly
[Amit Varma]: my vibe. But there was no reason for it. It was just that teenage boys tend to be rebellious,
[Amit Varma]: they tend to be angry, all of that it was almost like a fashionable thing. But I would
[Amit Varma]: imagine that, you know, a the experience can be much worse for everybody and be the experiences
[Amit Varma]: always much worse for girls that the world they're living in is a different world from
[Amit Varma]: what the boys experience. Right? So and I'm wondering, like, how much of your rage and
[Amit Varma]: anger just had to do with those layers that come only because of gender? And how much
[Amit Varma]: of it was just because bad aspects of the schooling that I might not have noticed or
[Guest]: been blase about?
[Guest]: Hmm. Things are bad for girls in very peculiar particular ways. That is not always acknowledged.
[Guest]: I agree with that. I'm not sure they're worse off. I'm not sure that I feel that even though
[Guest]: boys will not typically self harm, they will harm others. You know, they will they will
[Guest]: get into a different kind of violence. Their self harm will not involve cutting themselves.
[Guest]: But substance abuse is is self harm. And, and I think I really do worry. I worry for
[Guest]: the boys and I worry for the men. And but to come back to my own experience, you know,
[Guest]: I started with a I went to school first in Ranchi. And, and of course, so there was one
[Guest]: Loreto convent and one St. Xavier's. And it was, you know, that that's what you were supposed
[Guest]: to do. So I went to Loreto convent. And I remember the name of my nursery teacher. And
[Guest]: she was, she was, she was much admired by the parents. But she just believed in corporal
[Guest]: punishment. She had a cane. And, you know, this is the late 70s. And there were some
[Guest]: children who would not get instructions, did not understand English in the way that children
[Guest]: from a different kind of family would understand. And they were the ones being caned. And this
[Guest]: is a girl's school. You know, it's not behavioural, oppositional behaviour, particularly that
[Guest]: the child is displaying, it's just a child who didn't understand homework or didn't can't
[Guest]: make the line like you asked her to make it, or came back late from lunch or, you know,
[Guest]: spilled something. And I, I have not forgotten the, the pain of witnessing other children
[Guest]: being humiliated, you know, wanting this beating to stop and, you know, and just that act,
[Guest]: Amit, where we, we make the child participate in the violence, you know, we say, put out
[Guest]: your hand. And when they can't put out their hand, we keep yelling till they voluntarily
[Guest]: put out their little palm. And if they take it back, then they are abused. So you, it's,
[Guest]: it really is child abuse. You know, when you look at it, and it's normalised. That, so
[Guest]: my, my, my brain as a child, could understand that there were some people in the family
[Guest]: who were cruel, that there were some men in the family who had rage issues. But a school
[Guest]: was supposed to be a safe space. You were sent there with trust, you wore this uniform
[Guest]: to become a better person. And then for that to be violated. Then we moved to Calcutta.
[Guest]: And I was in school there for three or four years, we came to Delhi. And I went to a school
[Guest]: very close to where we are recording right now, which was a new school, very, it was
[Guest]: set up by the founders. And the founders of that school had all come from modern school
[Guest]: Barakamba with this dream of starting a child friendly school. And by luck, my younger brother
[Guest]: and I, we landed there because we were late into the city. And this was a new school they
[Guest]: took us. They even gave us a double promotion because we were smart little kids. They said,
[Guest]: you're good enough to go to the next class. They were very loving, but they were not the
[Guest]: top brand. So my parents, you know, middle class, upwardly mobile, putting all their
[Guest]: investment into the idea of giving us the best education put me in this large school.
[Guest]: Now that I look back at it, being in a class of 50, 11 year olds and 12 year olds being
[Guest]: with teachers who could not cope with the workload, they could not cope with the kind
[Guest]: of syllabus that they had to cover with the kind of PTMs that were expected of them. So
[Guest]: the only way they had to control us was punishment, yelling, abuse. It was par for the course.
[Guest]: It still is. You know, India hasn't changed in that sense. The world hasn't changed in
[Guest]: that sense. At 11 and 12, I can only look back and say, I gave up. You know, so I was
[Guest]: seriously suicidal at 12. And so I look back and I wonder what would make a 12 year old
[Guest]: make a serious suicide attempt. And I guess the sense that that child had was, this is
[Guest]: such a cruel place. I don't want to be here. This is the last step for my parents. I can't
[Guest]: negotiate with them. They've put their all into this. Something made me invisible in
[Guest]: the family. Perhaps I was a middle child. Perhaps my parents were too caught up with
[Guest]: the big city and all its own demands on them as a service class family, a single income
[Guest]: family. But something made me feel that it wouldn't matter to the world if I ceased to
[Guest]: exist. And of course, nothing could be far from the truth. And I'm just lucky to have
[Guest]: survived and therefore witnessed what would have happened to these people if they had
[Guest]: lost their daughter. You know, I was witness to my parents' shock, their mourning, their
[Guest]: incredible sense of loss that there was actually a child in the family, so much on the brink
[Guest]: and they couldn't, that they hadn't seen it. So personally, for me, it was a turning point
[Guest]: to the in the sense that I decided when I was coming back to life that I was never going
[Guest]: to make this mistake again. And I never did. And it has, it kind of gave me not only an
[Guest]: emotional strength, I think I could say some kind of a spiritual strength. You know, that
[Guest]: there's a reason you're alive. There's no way, you know, there is a purpose. You wouldn't
[Guest]: have come back if it hadn't been for that. So it carried me through. But it also gave
[Guest]: me a kind of an outsider's view of the world that I had kind of departed from in a sense.
[Guest]: I, you know, I came back to school after a year because I had disabilities and, you know,
[Guest]: my surgeries took a very long time to heal. So and now I was a special kid. So no pressure
[Guest]: would be put on me. I didn't have to take exams for some time. In a way, I kind of made
[Guest]: the world made some space for me. And I then began to feel more like a witness to what's
[Guest]: happening around. And of course, the rest of the years, one continued to watch the same
[Guest]: things that there are some children who are completely, you know, kind of falling through
[Guest]: the cracks. They're being bullied for being fat, for being short, for not being able to
[Guest]: speak in a certain accent, for belonging to a certain social class. And yeah, so I did
[Guest]: come back while I earlier felt completely helpless that I wanted to help somebody who
[Guest]: was feeling humiliated in class and I had no tools. When I came back, I felt that I
[Guest]: could reach out to this person that, you know, that that's what I could do. And that's literally
[Guest]: how I spent the rest of the four years in my school kind of being a little bit on the
[Guest]: margin, but being okay with that. And that is what came back to me when the parenting
[Guest]: years started, particularly when the schooling years started. You know, how much has the
[Guest]: world changed? And I did go into the whole system with the expectation that all that
[Guest]: primitive stuff is over. But that's not what I discovered.
[Amit Varma]: And when this incident happened, what was it like to try and figure out the why? Like
[Amit Varma]: both for you and your parents? Like, how do you figure out the why? Because for your parents,
[Amit Varma]: I can imagine it would have come like a bolt from the blue, they would have had no idea.
[Amit Varma]: How do you come to terms with why, you know, how do they come to terms with why their little
[Amit Varma]: girl felt that way? And what should they do about it? Because as a parent, you want to
[Amit Varma]: be able to control that. And for you, you know, in that moment, when you come out of
[Amit Varma]: it, how do you process that in terms of why I tried that and why I won't try that again?
[Guest]: How did that play out?
[Guest]: One of the big kind of awakening things that I experienced while I was still very much
[Guest]: in pain and in hospital, between surgeries even, was that my parents were not as invincible
[Guest]: as I had imagined them. They were not able to cope with the hospital system. They didn't
[Guest]: know what was happening. They didn't know what was the right thing to do. They had two
[Guest]: other children who had to keep going to school or who, you know, needed some kind of daycare
[Guest]: while they were here. I saw how the world functioned also in a very positive way. Extended
[Guest]: family turned up. People moved down, you know, they came from wherever they were. They took
[Guest]: trains and flights. They would just turn up in my hospital room in solidarity with my
[Guest]: parents. So one was that, you know, I could understand what the doctors were saying better
[Guest]: than my father was being able to process it. And I was listening to all the conversations
[Guest]: about the bills and, you know, how the house is going to, how the other, my younger brother
[Guest]: is 10 years old. He's like, he's not even like awakened into a human hood yet. He's
[Guest]: just a little brat who's looking for a place to play all the time. So, so I, you know,
[Guest]: I'm kind of witnessing them in this kind of distress. And what I, what I held against
[Guest]: them earlier that they were not mindful, they were not paying attention, they were not aware,
[Guest]: you know, I kind of realized how helpless they were, how much they were, didn't really
[Guest]: belong to the city. They're both first generation, you know, urban dwellers. And on their part,
[Guest]: while they were handling all the logistics, they really didn't have the capacity to understand
[Guest]: it as a mental health issue or to know what to do about it. There was such a massive stigma
[Guest]: attached to a suicide attempt by a young child, that actually the community, the family, everybody
[Guest]: rallied around them to not talk about it, to just invisibilize that, to never bring
[Guest]: it up. And they needed their own coping mechanisms. So they were doing a havan and they were calling
[Guest]: a pandit and, you know, my mother was reading her Guru Granth Sahib all the time, and also
[Guest]: giving it to me to read. And so while I, I mean, over time, I realized that this is this,
[Guest]: you know, that I accepted them as they are, and kind of took it upon myself to go on this
[Guest]: journey by myself, in a sense. And that shift in how I understood these adults around me,
[Guest]: that was huge, because as a child, you can make the mistake, and I think it's not a mistake
[Guest]: from the child's perspective, you know, the parents have all the power, and you're completely
[Guest]: powerless. And in a sense, your growing up years reveal, you know, that that shifts.
[Guest]: And for me, that shift, I also realized how traumatic it was for them. It was my father's
[Guest]: hair grayed in a month's time. You know, from a young 40 year old, he was suddenly looking
[Guest]: like an older man, my mother's body went into shock. And so that's that ridiculous idea
[Guest]: that I don't matter, completely, completely shifted. You know, that I would never want
[Guest]: to do that to them. I mean, that that kind of became a reality. And while my mother and
[Guest]: my father did not have a language to talk to me about it, it's also true that in that
[Guest]: world, there was no support system that could help them to find that language. If they wanted
[Guest]: to find a child counselor, they couldn't, you know, that there wasn't one. There was no family
[Guest]: counseling, even in the hospital itself. It was the the pastor who's coming in blessing
[Guest]: the family. Beyond that, there were no tools in a sense. And but, you know, many years
[Guest]: later, my daughter turned 12. And and she, you know, became quite anxious and unable
[Guest]: to deal with school, which we've spoken about before. And I and my mother looked at her
[Guest]: and she looked at me and she said, nobody can help this child more than you. Nobody
[Guest]: is better equipped to understand what Alisa is going through than you are. And I realized
[Guest]: in that moment that, you know, that all these years later, my mother's memory of myself
[Guest]: as a 12 year old is, is just as vivid. And and she, you know, she sees me as that, as
[Guest]: a woman who has grown from that moment of giving up. So in in in these big and small
[Guest]: ways. Yeah, it's it's it's been something that kind of turned around and became like
[Amit Varma]: a gift to the family.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems like what you describe of seeing your parents in a new way, that it humanize
[Amit Varma]: them for you, in the sense that I think, especially when we are kids, our parents are what they
[Amit Varma]: are, they are a role, they are a stereotype, they are, you know, in that groove. And to
[Amit Varma]: see them like that somebody's hair is graying, somebody, you know, to see them vulnerable
[Amit Varma]: to see them unable to cope. And I, I think a lot of people don't see their parents like
[Amit Varma]: that ever through their lives. And for it to happen at 12. And then later, when you
[Amit Varma]: are a parent, you know, what do you do to break that in the sense that, like, of course,
[Amit Varma]: your daughters would be more aware of you as a person than you perhaps were until that
[Amit Varma]: incident. But do you, you know, at some level, the relationship is going, you know, settles
[Amit Varma]: into these grooves. And how do you snap out? How do you like as a mother, do you sometimes
[Amit Varma]: sing that I must not be vulnerable in front of them? Or I can't show this side of myself?
[Amit Varma]: Or, you know, if I am telling them to be disciplined in a particular way, I have to be that person
[Amit Varma]: and be disciplined. Like there's one moving story from one of your essays, where at one
[Amit Varma]: point, you are with your parents, and you think your father was a stern man, and you
[Amit Varma]: want to impress him that you are also a disciplinarian, and you raise your voice to one of the kids.
[Amit Varma]: And the next day, your mom calls you and says, you know, your father, he was saying, don't
[Amit Varma]: do that. You don't know what kind of, you know, scars they can cause. So, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so what was that? You know, how do these play into each other?
[Guest]: Yeah. So I'm, I try to be very mindful of that. And I think it's a bit of a it's, you
[Guest]: know, it's a scale that keeps moving back and forth. They're in that time where, you
[Guest]: know, sometimes they feel so, so lost and defeated themselves that they, they will,
[Guest]: they will say, nothing's going to come out of this. I'll never be able to cope. I, you
[Guest]: know, I'll never get and you have to let them be in that moment. But you also, I guess that's
[Guest]: where I bring myself into the picture too soon. You know, you also want to share that,
[Guest]: look, I felt exactly like that. And I found a way and you'll find a way. I do. I show
[Guest]: my vulnerable side to my children a lot. Sometimes my friends tell me that, that, that I should
[Guest]: go a little slow and not, not be so open with them. But my experience with them, Amit, is
[Guest]: that there really isn't anything I can hide from them. They know. And, you know, particularly
[Guest]: when they were younger, they were really attuned to one's mood. And it's, I did, I did spend
[Guest]: the early years being very strong and always kind of trying to seem like I'm okay, when
[Guest]: I'm holding a child, when I'm in front of a child. But in retrospect, I think they can
[Guest]: always tell. And they tell me, they tell me, you know, they, so we've got, because I've
[Guest]: been a very keen photographer, you know, we've got a very rich family album that we often
[Guest]: go over and they'll, they'll look at my phone, they'll look at my computer. And there'll
[Guest]: be this beautiful, happy picture from a moment and they'll tell me, you know, I was really
[Guest]: scared that day. And I'll be like, I didn't know that. But if I remember what else was
[Guest]: happening, then I then I'm able to put together that yeah, so there was some chaos. And I'm
[Guest]: putting on this smile and so is the child, but she remembers that she was not feeling
[Guest]: okay in that moment. And sometimes it's very shocking for me because again, you can very
[Guest]: quickly begin to feel that it was all a lie. And you know, I thought it was okay, but it
[Guest]: was not okay, etc. But there's no there's no reason to have a meltdown. It's just it's
[Guest]: really a reminder that, you know, that it's not there is no binary of we were happy, or
[Guest]: we were not happy, or we're doing okay, or we're not doing okay. We're literally simultaneously
[Guest]: constantly moving between, between different states, we are anxious, but we're also, you
[Guest]: know, fine, at the same time. And we just need to be capacious enough to, to be able
[Guest]: to name both and to be comfortable with the idea that both exist.
[Amit Varma]: It's a very intriguing phrase capacious enough to be able to name both. And even earlier
[Amit Varma]: in different contexts, you've spoken about how, as a kid, you may not have had the language
[Amit Varma]: to put a word to something when you're talking about what things might be in your daughter's
[Amit Varma]: school, you're saying sometimes kids go through these things, but they don't have the vocabulary
[Amit Varma]: to express what is kind of going on. Like how much of a role do you think parents should
[Amit Varma]: play or how important rather is, is having that vocabulary, having those kind of frames,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you obviously you don't want to sit with your kids and tell them about the
[Amit Varma]: big bad world and all the ways in which it is big and bad when they're like seven years
[Amit Varma]: old. But at the same time, you don't want them beveled or not able to understand something
[Amit Varma]: not able to process something, you know. So how does this happen? Like I imagine to a
[Amit Varma]: large extent in your own case, you learn by living things happen, you figure them out,
[Amit Varma]: you think about them later. But in retrospect, you can put frames on things and understand
[Amit Varma]: them. But when it's your kids, I guess there is that dual imperative that on the one hand,
[Amit Varma]: you want them to be better prepared than you were to understand better than you were. But
[Amit Varma]: on the other hand, you don't just you know, you know that sometimes you just got to be
[Amit Varma]: spontaneous go through life, you can't control everything.
[Guest]: So all of these are, you know, the fallacies of control in a sense, that you want to protect
[Guest]: them, I won't let what happened to me happen to them, man, you have no idea what will happen
[Guest]: to them. You want to prepare them better, you have no idea what they're going to choose,
[Guest]: you know, to go towards. And, and also how, while children tend to be remarkably similar,
[Guest]: you know, what needs to be underlined even more is how individual, how individualistic
[Guest]: each one is, how we are different, and how much we change as we go. And, and so our relationships
[Guest]: constantly need to make space for that. And mine are forever surprising me, in a sense,
[Guest]: with, you know, being sometimes understanding things beyond the years, but then at other
[Guest]: times, not being able to cope in a way that I would think is, you know, much that they
[Guest]: should be able to at this age. And it kind of makes you realize that they live in a world
[Guest]: that you don't live in, that you, you know, that you can, you're familiar with, you can
[Guest]: get to know it. But what is it that they are experiencing constantly when my daughter opens
[Guest]: the same newspaper, as I do? What is it that speaks to her from it? What is it that she
[Guest]: catches from an adult conversation? What is it that she brings back from something that
[Guest]: she's heard outside the house, and how it sits in her psyche? Is, you just, you really
[Guest]: need to be open to discovering how these things play out. And I think that that is perhaps
[Guest]: an subconscious reason why I have been such a documentator of everything, you know, of
[Guest]: things we experience, of things they say, of, yeah, and I mean, so when I go back to
[Guest]: read some of the things that they've said, when they were very little, when we didn't
[Guest]: take them seriously, if somebody said, Oh, I dreamt of this, or I imagine a world in
[Guest]: which something can happen. But I mean, I'll just give you another example. I just read
[Guest]: in a journal, my four or five year old is saying, you know, heaven is a place where
[Guest]: once you go there, you don't age. So you, you just remain like that forever. So actually,
[Guest]: I know you'll die before me. But when I reach there, I'll find you. And we'll be together.
[Guest]: And then she goes on to say, I will invent a video game. And then I will put you in that
[Guest]: video game. And you will be able to find, you'll have to find a treasure, which you
[Guest]: will, and then all your problems will be solved. And I was just reading it like many years
[Guest]: later and thinking, this little child is imagining me as a person who's looking for some treasure
[Guest]: that will solve my problems. And she's trying to solve it for me by, so just like a, makes
[Guest]: me kind of think that while you're going about your job, keeping your face, you know, trying
[Guest]: to keep it, trying to keep your stress from your children, they probably know better than
[Guest]: you what your state of mind is that you're probably hiding it from yourself in a way
[Guest]: that it can't be hidden from a child who's connected to you. And because I suppose they're
[Guest]: so I wouldn't, I wouldn't just say dependent on you. It's also because they love you so
[Guest]: much. They want to protect you as much as you want to protect them. And we don't always
[Guest]: dignify that. You know, they try to be as clued into you as, as, as you are to them.
[Guest]: And just being with them in that sense, not you don't necessarily need to do a course
[Guest]: in how do you talk to your child about good touch, bad touch, or, you know, strangers
[Guest]: and who to talk to and who not to talk to and stuff like that. None of those things,
[Guest]: really. I mean, it's, it's good to know those things as concepts to be aware of them. But
[Guest]: how they will all play out, when they will play out, what you will learn from your child
[Guest]: is actually going to be much more surprising than what you are going to give to your child.
[Guest]: And I one of the things I realized Amit was that the world doesn't feel safe to children.
[Guest]: You know, that, that, that idea that we have that he doesn't even know. You know, he's
[Guest]: the free child, who is unaware of what can happen to children. They're either just imbibing
[Guest]: our anxieties, as they are, or they are, you know, they are actually growing up in a noisier,
[Guest]: more chaotic, louder world. And, I mean, if you just pay attention to 20 minutes of television
[Guest]: in anybody's house, you'll get a sense of why. I mean, if that's the idea of the outside
[Guest]: world, it's not a surprise that they're they don't feel safe.
[Amit Varma]: First of all, I have to say, I'm pretty stunned by that journal entry, because just for a
[Amit Varma]: four or five year old girl at a conceptual level to think of death in that way, or that
[Amit Varma]: we'll stay the same age or that treasure hunting is pretty mind blowing to me. And I'm also
[Amit Varma]: struck by what you said about how parents think they can control more than they actually
[Amit Varma]: can. There was this sort of seminal book of social science, which came out in the 1990s
[Amit Varma]: called The Nurture Assumption by Judith Rich Harris, where she essentially spoke about
[Amit Varma]: how her study showed that kids were most influenced not by her parents, but by her peers, that
[Amit Varma]: the influence of parents was vastly overstated in popular culture, and that mostly it was
[Amit Varma]: peers and there was just a limited amount of difference that parents could make. While
[Amit Varma]: at the same time, it strikes me that parents can make a lot of difference in just the sense
[Amit Varma]: that I would imagine that your daughters have a greater sense of self awareness and questioning
[Amit Varma]: than they would if they weren't your daughters. Because that just seems to be what they see
[Amit Varma]: in you and you must be their primary role model in a sense. And it must then become
[Amit Varma]: a natural way that you're always thinking at that one extra level. I mean, the very
[Amit Varma]: act of journaling is something you would have encouraged and what is journaling but a way
[Amit Varma]: of examining yourself and shaping yourself.
[Guest]: I mean, your comments are making me think that I'm also kind of now reflecting on the
[Guest]: same incident that she told me this story and then she probably saw me write it. And
[Guest]: you know, she probably knows it's in my phone. She probably knows where she can read something
[Guest]: that she would have said 10 years ago. And I guess at least what it gives the child is
[Guest]: a sense of being important, of you know, what I say and what I feel and what I imagine matters
[Guest]: because it matters to my mother. And perhaps that's what I'm trying to reverse in how
[Guest]: I felt when I was a 12 year old that I could vanish from this family and it won't make
[Guest]: a difference to anyone. It was absolutely wrong, you know, in my imagination, but it
[Guest]: did feel like that. The child felt like that. And I don't want to raise I don't want to
[Guest]: make that mistake, raising a child. And hopefully, that has been the outcome of what I've been
[Guest]: writing and sharing. And I know that there are two things that surprise me. You know,
[Guest]: ever since my books came out, particularly since my books came out, but even before that,
[Guest]: a question that comes constantly, because I have written about the family as we are
[Guest]: growing up and children as we're growing up, and I'm using our names. And you know, nothing
[Guest]: is camouflaged in any way. So a question that comes is what about privacy? And what will
[Guest]: they feel about this when they grow up? And have you thought about that? And do you have
[Guest]: the right to tell this story? And, of course, it's a question that kind of alerts me, but
[Guest]: it's not a question that I'm not already very alert to, you know, as the adult who's kind
[Guest]: of taking control of the narrative of the public narrative, which does influence the
[Guest]: private space. So while it's for me to constantly be aware of it, two things that have answered
[Guest]: the question for me in some way is that when I actually slowed down on writing about them,
[Guest]: because they had become teenagers, because they were not only were they reading everything,
[Guest]: which they'd been doing for years, but now their friends or, you know, random strangers
[Guest]: would come up to them talk about it. And I felt that I need to minimize this to some
[Guest]: extent, or I need to be very careful of when and what I write. And also, they're changing
[Guest]: so much that I don't want to write something till I know what's going on. So therefore,
[Guest]: the gaps are longer. And my oldest daughter, she came to me and this she came to me during
[Guest]: the first lockdown in the pandemic years. She said, write about me. She said, I want
[Guest]: to see you write about me because I want to know what you're thinking. And, and I realized
[Guest]: that in that sense, it was, you know, it mattered to her that it wasn't just me creating content.
[Guest]: It felt so real and authentic to her that it mattered to her that she was not reflecting
[Guest]: in my, in my thoughts and my expression. And the other thing is this ritual that my, again,
[Guest]: something that started in the pandemic years, but the middle and the younger daughter, they
[Guest]: have a daily ritual. They don't have phones yet, but they will come one time in the day,
[Guest]: take my phone, open my Facebook, go to memories, and read Facebook updates that may feature
[Guest]: them. And then they will laugh, they will giggle, they'll show it to each other, they'll
[Guest]: come to me and say, what do you think this means? They'll show me something I may have
[Guest]: written about myself and forgotten about, but it's something that they enjoy. So it's
[Guest]: like they're kind of referring to the history of the family via the updates. And, and, you
[Guest]: know, so that kind of some, to some extent answers the question of do they mind? They
[Guest]: don't mind. They're, they're, they're enjoying it. And yeah, so I, I mean, I've, I never
[Guest]: really have had a doubt because I process things to such an extreme extent before they
[Guest]: go out into the public domain. So I do kind of do a lot of work before it goes out. I
[Guest]: delayed the books for them to be a certain age. I've delayed my third book for them to
[Guest]: cross a certain age. So I mean, I am actually doing a lot of homework in my head, but it's
[Guest]: also nice to see how they react. And it strikes me that when your elder daughter came to you
[Amit Varma]: and said, write about me, I want to, you know, know what you're thinking. It seems as much
[Amit Varma]: sparked by concern for you as anything else, that the sense that maybe it'll help you to
[Amit Varma]: write about her and to write about whatever. And earlier, we were speaking about, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: therapy at one point, to what extent is writing like therapy, in the sense that it helps you
[Amit Varma]: make sense of yourself, and it helps you make sense of the world. Like, you know, earlier,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned that when we were talking about mental health, you mentioned how there are
[Amit Varma]: so many hospitals all around you for physical health, but mental health, no one takes that
[Amit Varma]: seriously. And it is as big a problem. And I guess one reason for that would be the title
[Amit Varma]: of the show, right mental physical health, what happens to your body is a scene, mental
[Amit Varma]: health, what's happening in your mind is the unseen. And, you know, and I had sort of had
[Amit Varma]: occasion to think about this recently, because I started doing pretty dramatic things for
[Amit Varma]: my physical health in the sense that I realized at one point that all of us make so much of
[Amit Varma]: an effort to understand the world as intellectuals and writers, but we don't know our own bodies.
[Amit Varma]: And the trigger for this was one of my good friends said, why don't you get a continuous
[Amit Varma]: glucose monitor, a CGM, which I got the data from that was so alarming that I just changed
[Amit Varma]: everything about my life. And I became so much more aware of what I was putting in my
[Amit Varma]: body and how I was harming myself by say, not sleeping enough or, you know, sitting
[Amit Varma]: being too sedentary and all of that. And it's good to have that CGM for the body. But where
[Amit Varma]: is the CGM for the soul, as it were, if one can get metaphorical? How does how does one
[Amit Varma]: keep track of that? How can I examine my own mind and see what's going right and see what's
[Amit Varma]: going wrong, because the tendency is always to be self delusional about everything. So
[Amit Varma]: again, tying back to that whole thing of, you know, writing a therapy is writing one
[Amit Varma]: way of doing that is writing one way of always looking within yourself and figuring out what's
[Amit Varma]: going right and what's going wrong. And even apart from that, in a larger sense, what is
[Guest]: the CGM for the soul? Yeah, so I would absolutely I would say yes to that writing can be that.
[Guest]: And then I and I feel that, you know, actually, call it journaling, call it memoir writing,
[Guest]: call it personal writing. I think that it has a very important place in civilization.
[Guest]: It's it's something that, you know, we only kind of dignified very famous people with
[Guest]: writing autobiographies. You you that that mattered because we wanted to be like them.
[Guest]: But we only wanted to be like them because they had become famous or rich, or they were
[Guest]: born into a privilege. But what when we when we say that nobody wants to read your diary
[Guest]: or nobody wants to know your story or why does your story matter? In a way, what we
[Guest]: are repeating is, you know, caste, class, racial hierarchies, right? We are saying the
[Guest]: white man's story matters. The brown person's doesn't. The man's story matters. The woman's
[Guest]: doesn't. The adults matters. The child's doesn't. And, you know, who are you? You're just an
[Guest]: ordinary person. But no life is ordinary, right? And nobody has become anything without
[Guest]: at some point being ordinary. You have built on your ordinariness and discovered your extraordinary
[Guest]: or it has been recognized by the outer world as extraordinary and you've been rewarded
[Guest]: for it. And I just I feel that that this is something that it's like a magic pill that
[Guest]: nearly everybody has. And those of us who are unable to tell our stories are suffering
[Guest]: for it. And it reminds me of your comment about girls have it tougher. I feel that men
[Guest]: also have it really tough because they are not able to tell their story because they
[Guest]: are they are never, you know, they don't have that circle, even that circle of friends in
[Guest]: which somebody will just listen to what you feel or what you experienced or what happened
[Guest]: to you. You know, even it's rarer for men's friendships to support them in the way that
[Guest]: sometimes, you know, socially women are able to often offer each other support. But to
[Guest]: just to come back to writing as therapy, I feel very strongly that that this is something
[Guest]: that we need to build on as as a civilization, literally, that we need to introduce it, you
[Guest]: know, into schooling, we need to introduce it into our university experience. Who am
[Guest]: I? Where do I stand? How am I connected? Where have I come from? And so many of us, you know,
[Guest]: wait for so long, or wait for some kind of dramatic, near death experience before we
[Guest]: pay attention to, you know, what what shapes me? And what is it that I can, therefore,
[Guest]: give to the world? How can I make my existence significant? And it doesn't have to be in
[Guest]: a much large, you don't influence the outcome of a country's elections. But, you know, you
[Guest]: do influence those who are around you, with every choice that you make, whether it's about
[Guest]: planting a tree or feeding a cat, or just being kind to your employees. And there are
[Guest]: just so many ways in which the human this this pinnacle of, of the biological world
[Guest]: can actually change things around us. And I and so so I, I really strongly feel that
[Guest]: it's very important for us to have spaces. We don't have to publish books, and we don't
[Guest]: necessarily have to maintain years of blogs, but spaces in which we tell each other our
[Guest]: stories and discover how much we have in common and discover our strengths. It's literally
[Guest]: the same story that has your worst mistakes, as well as embodies your best coping mechanisms.
[Guest]: You know, I can cloud my suicide attempt at 12 and a half in layers of shame, and write
[Guest]: it off as the worst thing I did. Or I can also look at the same story and see what made
[Guest]: a child come to that point? And then what is it that sustained us after that? What did
[Guest]: it do to us? And there's so much, there's so much to learn from it, and therefore then
[Guest]: to share with others. And, yeah, so that's really what I've also now learned from doing
[Guest]: the memoir workshops. Because I didn't know these people existed. The ones who are coming
[Guest]: and who are writing and they're damn good writers.
[Amit Varma]: There'll be many more who will come and I'm struck by what you you know, about how men
[Amit Varma]: also would be so much helped by journaling, obviously, and, you know, you go through different
[Amit Varma]: things. But I think one thing about men is that we are socialised to believe that being
[Amit Varma]: vulnerable is to be unmanly, right? So even in our conversations with each other, we don't
[Amit Varma]: show that vulnerable side, you know, if we tear up while watching a movie in a theatre,
[Amit Varma]: we'll figure out the most surreptitious way. So no one notices that a tear is kind of dripping
[Amit Varma]: down. And what you just said about journaling, and I keep telling all my writing students,
[Amit Varma]: obviously, that you must journal, it's, you know, even if you're never going to publish
[Amit Varma]: it, even if you write a couple of hundred words a day, no matter what it is, that it's
[Amit Varma]: so important. I had a very resonant episode with Amitabh Kumar, where, you know, he published
[Amit Varma]: a journal as it were the blue book, beautiful book. And he'd spoken about the value of journaling
[Amit Varma]: in just sort of, you know, being a way to shape yourself, you know, if in one parallel
[Amit Varma]: universe, I journal for the next two years, and another one, I don't, I am, it's literally
[Amit Varma]: two different people, you know, and if you want to be the best version of yourself, the
[Amit Varma]: most clear eyed version of yourself, journaling is so important. So perhaps the answer to
[Amit Varma]: that question, where is the CGM for the soul? The answer is, it's a journal. So on that
[Amit Varma]: note, let's take a quick commercial break. And we'll continue talking on the other side.
[Guest]: Wonderful. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first
[Amit Varma]: heard of me because of my blog, India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009, and
[Amit Varma]: became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day, and was forced
[Amit Varma]: to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well,
[Amit Varma]: that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at India
[Amit Varma]: uncut.substack.com, where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write
[Amit Varma]: about some of the themes I cover in this podcast, and about much else. So please do head on
[Amit Varma]: over to India uncut.substack.com and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment
[Amit Varma]: that I write will land up in your email inbox, you don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe
[Amit Varma]: now for free. The India Uncut newsletter at India uncut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Natasha Badwar about her life
[Amit Varma]: and her work and all her insights on various subjects, not just parenting, but also humaning.
[Amit Varma]: Is there a word like humaning? We can create one. You can create a word called humaning.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, we are all humaning. So take me back to sort of your childhood then. You know,
[Amit Varma]: at one point, there's a sort of an interesting para by you, which I'll read out where you
[Amit Varma]: say, it was a very dissonant world for me. I admired my mother, but I wanted to be like
[Amit Varma]: my father. I wanted to travel, I wanted credit for my intelligence. I wanted to be a part
[Amit Varma]: of a larger world that all men seem to slip into with ease. I wanted to become somebody
[Amit Varma]: unlike my mother who apparently was a nobody, stop code, which is, you know, I guess a pretty
[Amit Varma]: accurate description of how the world is set up in terms of how families are structured
[Amit Varma]: and you know, what really goes on and the scene and the unseen as it were. So tell me
[Amit Varma]: a little bit about your childhood, about your parents, both your mom and your dad. You know,
[Amit Varma]: what was it like? Where did you you've already spoken a bit about school, but apart from
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: Something interesting about both my parents is that they were both four years old in 1947.
[Guest]: And that they were both born in Lahore. So the midnight straddlers. Yeah. And, but my
[Guest]: mother was a refugee. My father was only born in Lahore. My grandparents were in India and
[Guest]: remained in India on the Indian side. So they didn't go through the trauma of partition.
[Guest]: My mother's family is a Punjabi family who had to move under very traumatic circumstances,
[Guest]: leave behind a fairly affluent rural life and rebuild in Delhi and then Amritsar and
[Guest]: then back in Delhi again. I think my maternal grandparents ultimately died young because
[Guest]: of the aftermath. They did manage to settle their children as we say in Indian families
[Guest]: and the daughters were married and the sons were had a business to work with. But there
[Guest]: was trauma in the family, which I find very interesting in the sense that nobody talks
[Amit Varma]: about it.
[Amit Varma]: So you mentioned in one of your essays that your mother Sudha, she was a fifth daughter
[Amit Varma]: and the sixth child of her parents. And there were eight siblings. In fact, the sister she
[Amit Varma]: was closest to had killed herself in early 20s. Her name was Chanchal. Tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about what you sort of, what was their sense of family in the sense, were they always
[Amit Varma]: relatives around, were these much larger families than you would find today? So what was that
[Amit Varma]: sort of a family environment, which was there when you grew up? And you also mentioned that
[Amit Varma]: your mother would talk to you about a sister. What are the other kinds of conversations
[Amit Varma]: that you would have with both your parents?
[Guest]: My mother remembers her growing up years very fondly. She has no pre partition memory. She
[Guest]: has heard stories from her own family. But she remembers those growing up years of all
[Guest]: of them being in a house in Amritsar, of her mother being this very extremely talented
[Guest]: woman who was milking the cows, cooking on the tandoor, embroidering everything in the
[Guest]: house and raising these amazing children. At the same time, her father was a gifted
[Guest]: entrepreneur, what we would call today a serial entrepreneur. At one point, he did well enough
[Guest]: to go to Germany, buy a Mercedes and come back to Delhi driving it from Berlin. So quite
[Guest]: an adventurer. But he did pass on in his 50s. And so, mum remembers it all very fondly.
[Guest]: She remembers a large family. In fact, what I find quite amusing and interesting is when
[Guest]: my husband, who also grew up in a large extended family in a village, you know, where these
[Guest]: brothers are living together, and they have visiting relatives throughout summer every
[Guest]: year. So when my husband and my mother sit and chat, they have so much in common. And
[Guest]: I who grew up in a city will just kind of sit on the margin and hear the two of them
[Guest]: exchanging notes on their cows and their animals and their farms and the things they grew and
[Guest]: what they did as children. And it makes me wonder, it makes me wonder how I went and
[Guest]: found someone who would, you know, match with my mother in this way. So, yeah, so, you know,
[Guest]: this would be our, in popular terms, we would call this a family that did very well, despite
[Guest]: adverse circumstances, that survived well, that is a, you know, a well to do Punjabi
[Guest]: family who found their feet. What we all saw, and what we all lived through was also alcoholism,
[Guest]: addiction, preferential treatment towards the brothers or the sisters. My mother hates
[Guest]: to phrase it like that she won't do it. But I need to, I need to, because I don't want,
[Guest]: you know, I didn't want as a child, as I wrote in that essay, I didn't want as a child to
[Guest]: be to grow up to enter a marriage in which I had to minimize myself to fit in. As I saw
[Guest]: my mother having to do, my mother is as capable as my father, she's very smart, very bright.
[Guest]: But she has to be careful around the male egos in the family. She plays her role, you
[Guest]: know, good naturedly. But it was not something that I could emulate. As an Indian woman of
[Guest]: the 70s, who grew up in the 70s. And I just want to, as an aside, Amit, share with you
[Guest]: that one of the films that came out when I was a very little child, the first one I remember
[Guest]: seeing is Sholay. And there's Hema Malini and her tanga. And there are all the rescue
[Guest]: scenes, you know, that despite the fact that she's playing the dumb ballet in the beginning,
[Guest]: she's an independent woman. She's growing up with her aunt, without any parents. She
[Guest]: knows how to control a horse. The whole village is dependent on her for commuting. And, you
[Guest]: know, she does these amazing rescue acts when required. And, you know, that's the world
[Guest]: I grew up in. That's the woman I saw on the screen. And this other film that came out
[Guest]: around that time was Bobby. And while I didn't see Bobby as a very young child, I saw it
[Guest]: later, much later. I remember one of the early scenes when Dimple Kapadia stands in a doorway,
[Guest]: I think, with her hand on her waist and says, I'm a 21st century girl. And, you know, and
[Guest]: my little brain is going 21st century. So this is the 20th. So if she's the 21st century,
[Guest]: then so am I. And therefore, this is the kind of woman, this is the kind of assertiveness,
[Guest]: the kind of agency that I can have. And those are, you know, just some early decisions that
[Guest]: one took. It estranged me from my mother for many years. But I can say that, that over
[Guest]: the years, as I grew more aware and more mature, and also, you know, read good fiction and
[Guest]: nonfiction and, and became aware of feminist ideas, I began to, to not to see her as the
[Guest]: gifted person she is and not as a person who may have chosen to be chosen the roles that
[Guest]: are thrust upon her, you know, I began to see what else she's doing to express her individuality,
[Guest]: and how much I can gain from actually choosing my mother as my role model. It took me many
[Guest]: years, it took me decades, but I got there. And I think that that's, to be fair, been
[Guest]: a kind of a personal mental health journey for me. I cannot imagine a worse estrangement
[Guest]: for anybody than to not be able to identify with the parents who care for you. Because
[Guest]: then you're kind of lost in the world, you're just kind of looking for something else to
[Guest]: attach yourself to. And, and you don't necessarily have the best healthy boundaries, when you're
[Guest]: in that kind of state of mind. My father is a very interesting man. He's, he grew up in
[Guest]: a very authoritarian home. My grandfather, who was, interestingly, very, very kind to
[Guest]: me, he was, he was my grandfather, I was the chosen granddaughter, in a sense, I was favoured
[Guest]: over in terms of affection, in terms of his show of affection, I was favoured over the
[Guest]: boys, the grandsons, but Dadaji raised three boys, and he raised them very, very strictly
[Guest]: to the extent that they would hide when he came home. And also, my grandmother was very
[Guest]: ill and not able to, not able to withstand what partition had done to her family in many
[Guest]: ways. So Papa became an engineer, got a scholarship to study and joined the steel industry. And
[Guest]: in, in that, I think that that truly liberated my parents in a very interesting way. In that
[Guest]: his, when they got married, he was in Bhilai. And in Bhilai, they were no longer of their
[Guest]: village, no longer of their community. They belonged to this community of young engineers,
[Guest]: and their spouses, who had come from all over the country, who became friends, who kind
[Guest]: of offered support and solidarity and friendship and happiness and laughter to each other.
[Guest]: And I think it freed all of them in a in a very interesting way from the baggage of their
[Guest]: growing up years. And there was also, I guess, they were building the nation in a sense,
[Guest]: that he was part of Steel Authority of India. In the beginning, then he moved on to be a
[Guest]: design engineer in Mekon. So he came to Ranchi. And he's, he's been an engineer all his life.
[Guest]: He's still working in his late 70s. He's still working. So he's a workaholic. Clearly, he
[Guest]: cannot stop. He tried, you know, the lockdown made him stop. And he felt so miserable that
[Guest]: he said, I'm now, I know, I know what I'm going to feel like if, if or when I retire.
[Guest]: So I have decided that I'm not going to retire, I will work till the very end. And we have
[Guest]: learned reluctantly as his adult children to honour his need, in a sense. So, so yeah,
[Guest]: I come from these two Indian, ordinary Indians, who were part of the building of this nation,
[Guest]: to an extent. So none of them are, you know, both of them are first generation, English
[Guest]: speakers. None of them speak it very fluently. So for them to raise children in Bhilai, in
[Guest]: Ranchi, in Calcutta, the whole idea was, you know, to raise this modern generation of Indians
[Guest]: who would be global citizens. And they made the choices that were available to them, standing
[Guest]: in long queues to make sure that we got admission in good schools, saving and scrounging to
[Guest]: pay the fees, when they chose schools that had the highest fee, etc. You know, for the
[Guest]: for a very long time, when I when I grew up, and I kind of joined some of the civil society
[Guest]: movements, when I was in college, the Narmada Bachao Andolan was at its peak in the just
[Guest]: around the 90s, the early 90s. And, and here was, you know, my parents are raising these
[Guest]: three children, yeh doctor banega, yeh engineer banega, yeh teacher banegi. So she can raise
[Guest]: children on the side, etc. But because of, because of our education, because of what
[Guest]: we were exposed to in a rapidly changing India, because this was a post emergency, post
[Guest]: Naxalite movement world, you know, we were aware of the fact that the youth is very
[Guest]: powerful, that you can resist, you can exercise dissent, you can, you can have a new
[Guest]: imagination. Now, you're no longer building the nation, you are asking some very important
[Guest]: questions about the environment and about indigenous people. So I was drawn to the Narmada
[Guest]: Bachao Andolan. And one of the first questions that one of the activists asked me at that
[Guest]: point, they said something about all the problems of this country are because of middle class
[Guest]: of the middle class. And I remember thinking, my father is middle class, what has he done?
[Guest]: What has he done wrong, that that these people are blaming someone like him for and it took
[Guest]: me a very long time to make the connections about what we blame the middle class in a
[Guest]: very generalized form for.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to dive deeper into each of these people you mentioned. But first, I want to
[Amit Varma]: ask about your nani. Like you've got this quote in one of your essays about how your
[Amit Varma]: nani shifted from, you know, Lahore to Amritsar. And you write quote, it took years, decades,
[Amit Varma]: generations for them to feel at home again. And I noticed that in right at the start of
[Amit Varma]: your first book, you have this biographical line, which says Natasha Badwar was born in
[Amit Varma]: Ranchi grew up in Kolkata and refused to accept Delhi as home for the next three decades.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to sort of ask you to talk a little bit about what did you mean by your nani and
[Amit Varma]: presumably other members of the family as well, not feeling at home for the longest
[Amit Varma]: time, and the concept of home as well. Like I read elsewhere, that one of your husband's
[Amit Varma]: favorite books is Aadha Gaon by Rahim Asom Raza, which is also a little bit about this
[Amit Varma]: right about coming to terms with what home is. So, you know, tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: this that, you know, what is home, you had another essay about it later, you know, within
[Amit Varma]: your nuclear family, as it were, we're talking about the concept of home and about your husband
[Amit Varma]: can really just chill anywhere, but it's not quite like that for you and how you've, you
[Amit Varma]: know, eventually learned to come to terms with what home could be for you. So take me
[Amit Varma]: a little bit through this journey of thinking about it, because, you know, I think particularly
[Amit Varma]: for that generation, and my father also was born in Lahore. So that means so that's like
[Amit Varma]: a lot of Lahore bonnies, as it were. So that notion of home and feeling that you belong
[Amit Varma]: in a particular place is really interesting to me, especially for the generation of our
[Amit Varma]: parents and even for us in just, yeah, even for us.
[Guest]: So what I know of my nani from my mother, and my mother is quite a storyteller, particularly
[Guest]: of those childhood years that are just, if she doesn't tell anyone, then they don't exist.
[Guest]: So her daughter becomes her witness in that sense. But they come from, I actually grew
[Guest]: up, went to Lahore, and looked for the place and it was the village has now been, you know,
[Guest]: kind of taken in by the city. So they came from a large village home. They were landowners,
[Guest]: my nana and nani. And my, my mother describes my nani as somebody who was, you know, when
[Guest]: the when the marriage proposal came, then she was chosen because she was such a talented
[Guest]: young girl, she could do everything herself. And in my maternal grandparents home is the
[Guest]: charkha that my nani used, is this contraption, I forget what it's called, in which she made
[Guest]: butter out of milk. And what they did when they came, she was actually expecting. My
[Guest]: aunt was born in September 47. And my grandfather brought his pregnant wife over first to Shimla
[Guest]: in July or August to make sure that she was safe, and then brought the rest of the children
[Guest]: and the extended family across the border, when they knew that they would have to shift.
[Guest]: So in the course of the years where they first lived in a small place in Delhi, then they
[Guest]: moved to Amritsar, where he started a transporters business, he, he had trucks, and then later
[Guest]: he had buses. And then they came back to Delhi and bought a large piece of land on the out
[Guest]: skirts of Delhi. They call that they refer to that home as border, because it's the Delhi
[Guest]: Ghaziabad border. And in that home, I think, the way it's described to me by my mother,
[Guest]: she recreated her village life. It was for after years, it was a big enough plot, a small
[Guest]: house. They kept their own cows. They she had she built a tandoor with her own hands,
[Guest]: she would make chapatis with the house help in that tandoor every day. And, you know,
[Guest]: this battery of sons and daughters, and extended family and in-laws that that Nani served.
[Guest]: So yeah, Nani is a bit of a superhero. In my mom's retelling, as well as in my imagination,
[Guest]: I only knew her as an old woman. And as somebody who rarely got out of bed. She wore white,
[Guest]: because Nana had passed on by then. And I think a lot of us remember these grandmothers
[Guest]: who were white Muslim and had very soft hands. I also grew up visiting my father's parents
[Guest]: in Punjab. And in in almost every, every, every summer vacation, we would visit them
[Guest]: and every two years, we would visit them in a new place. Because Dadaji was a postmaster.
[Guest]: He was. Yeah, so he worked in the post office. And for us as little children, he was a very
[Guest]: important man because wherever he was posted, he was the top boss in the post office. He
[Guest]: had a house next to the post office. He had people who worked for him. So towns like Fagwada,
[Guest]: Mirkotla, Barnala, and then finally Jalandhar were like home to us. Those were places we
[Guest]: used to visit. Also, Dadi's home, her maternal home was a very small village called Makhu.
[Guest]: And they had migrated. They were refugees from the Pakistan side of Punjab. And they
[Guest]: later, after 1984, left their village again and came to Delhi and settled on the outskirts
[Guest]: of Delhi in a more rural place. So being uprooted, losing home, building home, these are perhaps
[Guest]: these are themes that kind of run in the family in a sense. My grandfather's village, which
[Guest]: would be, you know, the village from where we originated as the Badwar family, is a village
[Guest]: called Khemkaran. And Khemkaran's in the history books because it's the site of the largest
[Guest]: tank war in 1971 or maybe earlier, the Indo-Pak war, not 71, the Indo-Pak war. There's a film
[Guest]: with Devanand in it in which he's part of the tank war and it's taking place in Khemkaran.
[Guest]: So Khemkaran barely exists anymore, because while it survived on this side of India, it
[Guest]: was too close to the border to survive the war. I never felt an affiliation to go to
[Guest]: Khemkaran or not. But in my late 20s, I was working closely with a sociologist. And he
[Guest]: asked me once over dinner, where are you from? And I mentioned Khemkaran. And he said, so
[Guest]: what is it like? And I said, I've never been there. And, you know, he's an Englishman who
[Guest]: had spent his life studying Indian communities. And he was quite shocked that he was meeting
[Guest]: an adult who was a media person who was not curious about the village that she had come
[Guest]: from. And it gave me food for thought. It made me look for the answer to the question
[Guest]: of why I was not curious about Khemkaran per se. And over the years, I realized maybe I
[Guest]: identify stronger with my grandmothers than with my grandfather. And with the non-Badwars
[Guest]: of the Badwar clan, you know, than the Badwar men, in a sense, and that's fine, as well.
[Guest]: I did, when I met my husband, who's from a village in East UP, and grew up in a very
[Guest]: interesting town called Jaunpur, but his village home is actually a village continues. It's
[Guest]: still a village in Ghazipur. One of the, you know, one of the vaguely attractive things
[Guest]: that vague seeming things that I was attracted to was the fact that being with him would
[Guest]: give me a village. And it would give my children a village to go to. And it's a it's a very
[Guest]: strange and convoluted kind of thing. It doesn't rationally make sense, but somehow you want
[Guest]: to give them the childhood that you have experienced. And because of the because of the very oppressive,
[Guest]: patriarchal ways of both sides of my Punjabi family, and possibly because of the violence
[Guest]: and the addiction that was not spoken about, I really didn't want to ever go back and look
[Guest]: for home in that part. I kind of wanted to create a new home, not so consciously. But
[Guest]: perhaps in a subconscious way, which is why even when I began to volunteer with the Narmada
[Guest]: Bachao Andolan and went to work in a tribal area in Madhya Pradesh, and I spent some very
[Guest]: significant months between my 20th birthday and my 21st birthday in a remote tribal village
[Guest]: in Jhabua. For the next few years, if someone asked me where are you from, I would say Jhabua.
[Guest]: I would say Madhya Pradesh. So I was missing home. I didn't have, I didn't want to belong
[Guest]: where I was technically from. But I was trying to imagine a new home. And my husband's favorite
[Guest]: story is that I tricked him. Because when he asked me, but are you a Punjabi? I said,
[Guest]: no, I'm from I'm a Bihari. I'm from Ranchi, which is true. I am from Ranchi. And when
[Guest]: we visited our relatives in Delhi and Punjab as children up to the age of 10, they would,
[Guest]: you know, perjuratively call us Biharis. They would say, Bihari aagay, Bihari aagay, ye
[Guest]: chawal khaate hain, which was like a bitter joke in a Punjabi family. Because we would
[Amit Varma]: look for rice when there was only roti. Chawal better than roti. I mean, they're both carbs,
[Amit Varma]: but still on a relative scale, chawal better than roti. But sorry. Yeah. And, and, and
[Guest]: we had, we had an accent. We, we said ek tho, do tho, teen tho. And it made me, you know,
[Guest]: almost it, it made me more loyal to my accent, to my home, to the idea that yeah, I'm born
[Guest]: in Ranchi and I am from Ranchi and who even wants to be from Punjab? Yeah, so it's, it's
[Guest]: kind of a shifting concept. Delhi was very hard for me to accept as home when for my
[Guest]: mother, it was a homecoming. For my father, it was the ultimate upward mobility. Because
[Guest]: what better can you do if you, you know, as an engineer, then having a private sector
[Guest]: job after all those years in the government sector in Delhi, where ultimately he buys
[Guest]: a DDF flat and he sends his children to public school. And, you know, for him, it was a kind
[Guest]: of a culmination of all the hard work he had put in. But for me, it was the loss of a childhood.
[Guest]: And my brothers didn't experience it like that. So I suppose it's somehow connects to
[Guest]: the uniqueness of who we are as children. And maybe Amit in a way childhood is home.
[Guest]: And when, when I imagined raising my children in Delhi, you know, I wondered, where is the
[Guest]: home? Which is the home that I will take them to? And I was, I continue to be very excited
[Guest]: about what I now very openly call my village home, which is my husband's home. You know,
[Guest]: we've been together for 20 years. I still stick out. I mean, I will always stick out
[Guest]: in that village. But it is my home. It is what I want to accept as my home. And of course,
[Guest]: it is now my children's home. So there's no question about it. And I guess that is in
[Guest]: a long winded meandering way about one's search for a place where you can belong, where you
[Guest]: can feel rooted, where you feel accepted as you are, without, you know, where they are
[Guest]: happy to see you just as you, not because of what you're doing in your career, or what's
[Guest]: in your, you know, what's your bank balance, or whether you're famous, or, you know, what
[Guest]: your social media followers are. It's just a place where you go, and everybody's just
[Guest]: always happy to see that you have come. But I must add that the pandemic being locked
[Guest]: down in our home, in Greater Noida, which again, I didn't want to belong to, I was very
[Guest]: resistant about that corner of the world where we were together. And where we kind of began
[Guest]: to, where a community of cats adopted us, and now we have two dogs as well, became the
[Guest]: place where we, I felt for the first time that I grew roots. And it is, for my husband,
[Guest]: it's a temporary home, he still imagines where he will retire, what he will build, maybe
[Guest]: in the mountains, maybe in Auroville. But his children are born in this house. So now
[Guest]: they're like, you can go where you want, but we are here. So it's interesting. And it's,
[Guest]: it's joyous to see how each generation actually defines their own sense of home.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe for younger generations, and I'm thinking aloud, maybe for younger generations,
[Amit Varma]: part of the concept of, I mean, the concept of home might be more nebulous, because part
[Amit Varma]: of their growing up is also on the internet. And in all these virtual spaces, and the geography
[Amit Varma]: doesn't matter so much. But, you know, for your kids to one day be asked, where are you
[Amit Varma]: from and for them to have to say Greater Noida doesn't sound exactly madly appealing to me.
[Amit Varma]: So now I have a question about one of the Bhadwars, which is your Dadaji, right? And
[Amit Varma]: at one point, you write about one, he's the only grandparent you really got to know, he
[Amit Varma]: lived till 90. And you were both sort of loving and confrontational. And I'll ask you to elaborate
[Amit Varma]: on that. But first, you know, you point out that when he got to know that you were going
[Amit Varma]: to marry a Muslim, Afzal, he was very upset about it. And you write, quote, Dadaji took
[Amit Varma]: the news of my decision to marry Afzal, a Muslim from Uttar Pradesh very badly. For
[Amit Varma]: a few days, he seemed to lose his grip on reality. He began to hallucinate and became
[Amit Varma]: paranoid. We did not know whether he would recover, but he did. When he met my in-laws,
[Amit Varma]: eventually, he was gracious, soaking in conversations in Urdu with my father-in-law and Afzal. When
[Amit Varma]: my when our youngest child Naseem was born, he called out to her each time we visited
[Amit Varma]: and glowed with happiness when she responded to him. Stop quote. And I'm just thinking
[Amit Varma]: here of that original reaction of his being so natural, because these people must have
[Amit Varma]: carried with them these unspoken, perhaps invisible scars from what happened during
[Amit Varma]: partition. So and, you know, a lot of stories I hear about people from that time and somewhere
[Amit Varma]: hidden in some subterranean way, you know, that scar is there, those memories are there,
[Amit Varma]: you know, any other generation, say a generation after that, you know, like your kids, for
[Amit Varma]: example, would not, you know, their grandparents would have lived normal lives relatively,
[Amit Varma]: but these your kids, grandparents, but your grandparents were uprooted. And that was part
[Amit Varma]: of what you saw. And you only got glimpses of it. And I'm guessing this was a glimpse.
[Amit Varma]: So when you see, like, how much of a psychic scar was partition, not just on that generation,
[Amit Varma]: but on our culture, in the sense that we can today see the religious polarization around
[Amit Varma]: us. I mean, it's not even that to just call it by its name, there is this vicious anti
[Amit Varma]: Muslim politics that is destroying our society, right? And the question is that, are these
[Amit Varma]: fissures that, you know, go back 10s, but go back decades and hundreds of years? Or
[Amit Varma]: is partition still a big part of it, especially in the north? You know, nebulous question,
[Amit Varma]: but how does memory play a part in all of this, perhaps even a collective memory, because
[Amit Varma]: that generation is really, you know, old and whatever, but you see young people everywhere,
[Amit Varma]: seething with so much rage directed at the other, when they can't have any memory of
[Amit Varma]: what went on, you know, they watch Hindi films all the time, Shah Rukh Khan, Aamir Khan,
[Amit Varma]: etc, etc. So what's sort of going on here?
[Guest]: I do agree that partition is a scar on our psyche. But I don't believe, Amit, that what
[Guest]: we are living through in terms of this very vicious anti Muslim sentiment in Indian society
[Guest]: at this moment, not only sentiment, but acts at this moment, in time are connected to the
[Guest]: tragedy of the partition. My grandfather, who did, who was alive, when Afzal and I decided
[Guest]: to get married, is not, you know, he did not suffer the blow of partition at a personal
[Guest]: level. My mother, who did, is a natural liberal. She knew Afzal from the day I knew him. She
[Guest]: liked him from the day I liked him. She loved him from the day I loved him. She has a natural
[Guest]: connection to him. So do many other members of my family, who are, you know, while there
[Guest]: are some people who are not able to get over the loss and do hold a grudge against a community
[Guest]: that would have perpetrated violence on members of their family. At the same time, there are
[Guest]: enough partition survivors who mourned the loss of the social fabric that was actually
[Guest]: very syncretic and very supportive of them. So on my mother's side, the stories that we
[Guest]: hear again and again is how when my grandfather went back, and he went back many times. And,
[Guest]: you know, like most people who cross the borders, they didn't realize for a very long time that
[Guest]: very soon would come a day when the border would be sealed. They were not anticipating
[Guest]: the wars. So they were actually thinking, okay, we have to live here, but we can go
[Guest]: back and forth. So my grandfather went back, and he went back a couple of times. And he
[Guest]: was always received with great hospitality, people, his neighbors, his, you know, people
[Guest]: who worked on his farm, they would cry when they met him, they would host him, they had
[Guest]: kept with great protection, the things that he had left behind and given them to him when
[Guest]: he went to pick them up. So he suffered loss, but he didn't have any rancor against people.
[Guest]: He saw it as a political act. He was able to see it like that. And what we see in our
[Guest]: society today, what we are, you know, what a lot of young people are beginning to subscribe
[Guest]: to is, I don't think we can blame the violence of partition for it. This is a systematic
[Guest]: work done by the RSS and by the the Hindu right wing over years. And my grandfather's
[Guest]: reaction to, you know, his granddaughter choosing to marry a Muslim came from his affiliation
[Guest]: with the RSS, not from his memories. And my brother told me, my older brother once told
[Guest]: me that, you know, when I was, he lives in the US, he went there as a doctor to study
[Guest]: further and settle there. And when I met him after that, the first time he told me, you
[Guest]: know what Papa said to me when I was at the airport? And he said, listen, you'll meet
[Guest]: people and you'll make choices. Just make sure it's not a Muslim. And I was like, really?
[Guest]: It was not something that had ever been articulated in our home. We had never heard our father.
[Guest]: He had never said anything like this in our home. But he said it to his son. And interestingly,
[Guest]: he never said it to me. Of course, I am the special child of the family. That's also part
[Guest]: of the truth. But it alerted me to this code. And I think that when Dadaji reacted, Dadaji
[Guest]: had earlier, when he had discovered that I had a friend, a male friend, his first question
[Guest]: was what caste is he? And I was like, goodness gracious. It's the 1990s. Are we still asking
[Guest]: caste? I was blind. I was blind to how much how relevant this question still was and continues
[Guest]: to be. I'd just grown up in this kind of, you know, bubble that young people often do.
[Guest]: They believe what is in their textbooks, and they believe what is in their inspirational
[Guest]: stories that they have read or what the leaders are saying. So his, it was more of a patriarchal
[Guest]: got, you know, keep the family within the caste class structure reaction. And even when
[Guest]: the anti-CAA protest started, I remember my mother was very upset. And this is not a political
[Guest]: woman. This is not a woman who's, you know, reading a lot or keeping, you know, she's
[Guest]: not a drawing room commentator of politics. But it hurt her enough to say to me, what's
[Guest]: going on? This is too much. Ye zyada ho gaya. You know, and this was a natural reaction
[Guest]: of a person. So I think that I often wonder what it is, what are the influences that take
[Guest]: us towards liberal choices? And we are other people towards these very exclusionary ideas.
[Amit Varma]: I'm in partition as a psychic fissure, which is a contributing factor. I think we've been
[Amit Varma]: an illiberal society for the longest time. I'd done this episode with Akshay Mukul on
[Amit Varma]: the Gita Press, and all of these issues that seem so toxic today, love jihad, cow slaughter,
[Amit Varma]: all of these, these were live political issues in the 20s, they were politicized, they were
[Amit Varma]: kept alive. And, and yet there is also the other side, like I did an episode with Mukulika
[Amit Varma]: Banerjee, I don't know if you heard that, where she speaks about how she spent some
[Amit Varma]: time in Pakistan, because she was, you know, writing a book on the Khuda-e-Khidmatgar.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously the Khuda-e-Khidmatgar had died down soon after partition. But she was looking
[Amit Varma]: for survivors and going from village to village to try and find people who still survived.
[Amit Varma]: So all through rural northwest frontier province. And she realized as she set out on those journeys,
[Amit Varma]: that over there, the food that was really cheap was beef. And but every house would
[Amit Varma]: have one chicken and chickens were really expensive. But every house would have one
[Amit Varma]: chicken for a special guest, if a special guest ever wanted it. And every time she would
[Amit Varma]: land up, you know, just out of basic mehman nawazi, they would give her the chicken and
[Amit Varma]: she felt guilty that they are spending them, you know, so much money. And she didn't want
[Amit Varma]: that. So she started eating beef. And then she speaks about how she went home and she
[Amit Varma]: told her mother this. And her mother thought for a while and said, beta yeh toh karna hi
[Amit Varma]: toh insaniyat hai, right, which shows that many of us we could be religious, but there
[Amit Varma]: is also that strain that, you know, you have that empathy for the for everyone around you,
[Amit Varma]: you have that sense of living together. And I'm reminded of this by a story I read about
[Amit Varma]: Ehsan Jafri, which also ties in with one of the essays that you wrote in your first book
[Amit Varma]: and you put on your newsletter recently. And the story about Ehsan Jafri is that he suffered
[Amit Varma]: through riots in the 60s or early 70s or whatever. But he refused to shift to a Muslim only area.
[Amit Varma]: He said, I will not go to a ghetto. He said, that is not the India I believe in. In the
[Amit Varma]: India I believe in, we can all live together, nothing will happen. Right. And he did that
[Amit Varma]: he made that choice. And we know what happened to him. Right. And you wrote this essay about
[Amit Varma]: how you tried to book a hotel for your husband and Amritsar. And you had a perfectly nice
[Amit Varma]: conversation with the people who ran this guest house or gave out the house on rent
[Amit Varma]: and whatever, till they discovered that your husband's name was Muslim and you were booking
[Amit Varma]: it for him. And you got really offended when you know, they just changed their tone completely.
[Amit Varma]: And your thing was that forget it, we'll just find another place. But your husband said
[Amit Varma]: that no, I want to talk to them. You know, they've probably never met someone like me.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned how he was from a school where he was the only one like that people
[Amit Varma]: would come to look at him to see what he looks like. But then they all became friends. And
[Amit Varma]: he said, no, it's important for them to meet me. And what I find here is this common belief
[Amit Varma]: between Ehsan Jafri, between your husband, between millions of Muslims who made the choice
[Amit Varma]: in partition to stay in India to embrace a particular vision of what this country is
[Amit Varma]: like. Right. And I find that very moving, because I now wonder if in a sense, either
[Amit Varma]: they were wrong, or they have been betrayed. Because my sense growing up in the elite bubble
[Amit Varma]: that I did the elite English speaking bubble is that by and large, we are tolerant, by
[Amit Varma]: and large, we are liberal, by and large, we are secular. Right. And today, I'm beginning
[Amit Varma]: to feel that no, I was just mistaken all along. This is a delusion, right? By and large, we
[Amit Varma]: were a bigoted, hateful society all along. And place where we are today, we were bound
[Amit Varma]: to come here at some point or the other. So I feel that I might, of course, be veering
[Amit Varma]: too much towards the pessimistic because that's just how I am. But what is what is your sense
[Guest]: of this? You know, how do you process all of this?
[Guest]: I'm kind of looking forward to answering your question, because I process this all the time.
[Guest]: You know, I just kind of by choosing to marry, even more than that, by having children in
[Guest]: an interfaith marriage, children with, you know, growing up in these times, it's, it
[Guest]: becomes literally a question that you have to process every day, including the question
[Guest]: of are we delusional about the fact that we are safe? You know, we don't live in a Muslim
[Guest]: majority area, we are the only interfaith marriage in a predominantly BJP voting locality.
[Guest]: And when push comes to shove, what happened to Ehsan Jafri can happen in my street to
[Guest]: my home. And we've seen, we've seen, you know, we've seen enough of this playing out in front
[Guest]: of our lives starting from 47. Neighbors, you know, were the most viciously violent
[Guest]: towards each other in that time as well. And neighbors were the ones who were the ones who reached out
[Guest]: to save each other as well. I feel and I do actually get a lot, I am influenced a lot
[Guest]: by what my husband shares. Because far more than me, I mean, I have not really experienced
[Guest]: anything in comparison to his lived experience throughout his life. I feel that we're just
[Guest]: on a spectrum. We have the capability to be very bigoted. We also, at the same time can
[Guest]: be extremely compassionate and hospitable towards the same people that we can exclude
[Guest]: with our bigotry. We also have the capacity for extreme violence. Our best friends can
[Guest]: be the people who will point out our home to the mob when the moment comes. They can
[Guest]: be the people whose home will be my refuge if the mob comes. I don't know which way it
[Guest]: will go because from just reading the stories of what my mother's generation has lived through
[Guest]: and what 2002 Gujarat has lived through, it can go either ways. And therefore, I don't
[Guest]: feel defeated or pessimistic. I feel that we have the capacity to influence how the
[Guest]: other person reacts. I mean, I was in Delhi in 1984 when the riots broke out. And I lived
[Guest]: in a third floor flat from my terrace. We saw the fires being lit. We saw the mobs.
[Guest]: It literally, I have witnessed those riots. So I know that in that moment, there is not
[Guest]: very much that one can do. But I know that many of the people who participate in riots
[Guest]: are people who have done good things before that and people who go on to do good things
[Guest]: after that. And we really are a very strange kind of species that just has the capacity
[Guest]: for both within us. I mean, the RSS, even the Muslim right-wing organizations, student
[Guest]: organizations, these are groups and communities that have also been in the forefront of rehabilitation
[Guest]: efforts, when there have been earthquakes, when there are floods, when there is a disaster
[Guest]: like an air crash. And, you know, we have known to rely on them. They have been very
[Guest]: important in terms of civil society groups as well. So, we certainly look like we are
[Guest]: on a very fast kind of decline towards chaos and violence as a society. There are enough
[Guest]: warning bells and we need to heed them. But what is it that one does when one sees a fire,
[Guest]: you know, igniting or when you see a small fire that could become... There is a long
[Guest]: time when you do have the power and the ability and the influence to be able to do something
[Guest]: about it. And I think that people like you and me are, you know, we have the privilege
[Guest]: in every which way to be able to influence our times in some way, to be able to influence
[Guest]: the same people who are likely to engage in very bigoted or very violent behavior. And
[Guest]: we, I mean, this is really a time when all of our energy should be in a sense ignited.
[Guest]: And that story that I wrote about him not getting a room in Amritsar because he's a
[Guest]: Muslim and then his insistence on having a cup of tea with that couple. I sat on it for
[Guest]: a year and a half before I wrote it. It took me time to process what it was. And it took
[Guest]: me time to get over my own feeling of protectiveness towards him. I was also more offended because
[Guest]: she's a Punjabi and so am I. She's from Amritsar. I mean, Amritsar is my mother's city. Talk
[Guest]: to me. I mean, how dare you, you know, do this to me. Some of it is kind of almost personal
[Guest]: in that sense. But I didn't have an idea of what it would mean to write that story. It
[Guest]: just stayed with me, lingered in my head that this is a moment that says something to us
[Guest]: about us. And a lot of people ask me what happened. You know, I didn't write about what
[Guest]: happened. He did have tea. He went over. He called them. He said, I will come over for
[Guest]: tea. He went there. They were just elderly and vulnerable and confused. And in that moment,
[Guest]: he didn't hold a grudge against them. They were uncomfortable, but he could no longer
[Guest]: hold a grudge because they were also, you know, old. And they didn't have the support
[Guest]: of a society or an administration if, you know, if they did something that put them
[Guest]: out of their comfort zone. So, yeah, I couldn't write it because it just made me very sad.
[Amit Varma]: I love this quote where you quote your middle daughter, Aliza, and she says, quote, I'm
[Amit Varma]: a Muslim, a Hindu, an Indian, and I love Harry Potter, stop quote, which is such a perfect
[Amit Varma]: sort of illustration of the multitudes we contain and carry within us. But equally,
[Amit Varma]: the counterpoint to that was a story you told of how you went with your daughters to this
[Amit Varma]: hairstylist. And the hairstylist asked them that, what are you? You know, you're Muslim,
[Amit Varma]: right? And one of your daughters said, no, no, I'm a Muslim and a Hindu. And the hairstylist
[Amit Varma]: was no, no, you have to be one or the other. You can't be both. Right, which is, which
[Amit Varma]: is tragic. And I'd say that perhaps in this country, we are getting to a point where the
[Amit Varma]: majority point of view is probably the hairstylist point of view. But leaving that aside and
[Amit Varma]: going back in time, again, we've spoken about a couple of your grandparents, let's speak
[Amit Varma]: about your mom, because there are two very interesting places where you mentioned her
[Amit Varma]: and you and you write about her. And one of them is where, you know, your daughters are
[Amit Varma]: sitting at the table with you. And they are sort of discussing, I think, what they'll
[Amit Varma]: be like, 20 years later, or something like that. And all the daughters say, oh, we will
[Amit Varma]: be the same. And then one of them says, but mommy will be like Nani. And then they all
[Amit Varma]: look at you. And you can tell that they're looking at you and thinking that she's not
[Amit Varma]: like Nani. She's completely different. Right? And you go on to elaborate on why. And in
[Amit Varma]: another place, you write, quote, the first time I saw my mother when I looked into a
[Amit Varma]: mirror, it startled me. I was getting ready for my wedding. My friend Reena had tied up
[Amit Varma]: my hair and done my makeup. Oh my god, it was my mother looking back at me, my mother
[Amit Varma]: from a wedding album. How was it even possible? We weren't supposed to be alike, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: You know, tell me a bit about this, because I see this conflict. I see how, when we are
[Amit Varma]: growing up, we might sometimes resent our parents not want to be like them, and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth. But as we grow older, we understand them so much better. And as we grow older,
[Amit Varma]: it's possible for us to turn into them. I think that for many people is a great fear.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I think Ramanujan has a great poem about how he looks into the mirror and sees
[Amit Varma]: his father staring back at him, right? So tell me a little bit about your relationship
[Amit Varma]: with your mother. Like, did you talk? When did you start talking? What was the nature
[Amit Varma]: of the conversations? Like, at one point after your book was out, you mentioned how she read
[Amit Varma]: the book and she told you, I never knew you could think so much, right? Which sort of
[Amit Varma]: indicates that earlier in your relationship, you were both on grooves, where she's a mother
[Amit Varma]: and you're a kid, and you're the kid, and she's a mother, and you're both on that groove.
[Amit Varma]: And it takes something for you to look at each other as people again, perhaps with you,
[Amit Varma]: it was that incident when you were 12. And you see your parents vulnerable and broken.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you see that. But tell me a little bit about how this evolved, how you
[Guest]: started relating to each other in interesting ways. So yeah, like I shared earlier, because
[Guest]: my mother didn't work, because my grandfather, he had a charming, attractive personality.
[Guest]: My father doted on me, you know, as a young child. And both of them had this feature where
[Guest]: they were not able to love the boys. They were not able to be affectionate to the boys,
[Guest]: but they could be soft. And so, Papa only has one daughter, and my grandfather only
[Guest]: had one granddaughter. And I got, I got, you know, I got access to the softer side of them.
[Guest]: My father did better, but my grandfather was never able to be soft with his wife. He was
[Guest]: always, he always had to be authoritarian, and he always had to be. But in that kind
[Guest]: of dynamic family dynamic, I saw my mother as a worker. You know, as somebody who was
[Guest]: always doing things, she rarely had time to be with the children. And when she did, I
[Guest]: now understand that she needed to spend a lot of, she spent more time with my elder
[Guest]: brother, because he was more vulnerable than us, because he got the brunt of my father's
[Guest]: anger, and she was protecting him. But I resented that as a child, I felt neglected by her.
[Guest]: And because I wanted to be part of larger society, I, you know, I wanted to be seen
[Guest]: as a person, not just as a mother, wife, housemaker. And my mother never articulated any of these
[Guest]: things to me. I did kind of distance myself from her psychologically, over time. She wouldn't
[Guest]: take care of herself. She was always wonderfully turned out in social occasions, but at home,
[Guest]: she didn't have the resources for self care. And, and, you know, as this smart school going
[Guest]: kid, I didn't identify with her in that sense. I could say just in simply in one sentence
[Guest]: that my mother always toned herself down. She would diminish herself to save herself
[Guest]: from being demeaned by somebody else. And I didn't, I, because she didn't share it with
[Guest]: me, she didn't articulate it with me, I didn't have any tools to see that till I was really
[Guest]: grown up. And at a distance from her. I did have many years of, you know, estrangement,
[Guest]: but also tremendous guilt, tremendous guilt that I could not be the daughter she wanted
[Guest]: me to be. Because I had other dreams and aspirations, I had to go out. I just couldn't be the woman
[Guest]: that she could show off at a wedding as the newly eligible, you know, for marriage person,
[Guest]: I was not going to play that role. Of course, you can, you know, when you look back, everything
[Guest]: you are is because your parents didn't stop you from becoming that. And you have to give
[Guest]: them credit for that. We know, we know that parents have the power to do that. And we
[Guest]: see that in other people's families. When we look at someone and we say, why does she
[Guest]: not break free, you realize how strong those chains are. Clearly, they were not anybody
[Guest]: holding me back, even if they were not saying, Jah Simran Jah, the fact that Simran was going
[Guest]: and coming, according to her own wish, meant that, you know, that there was a permission
[Guest]: to do that. This moment when I looked in the mirror and saw my mother, because I'm done
[Guest]: up in the same way that she is, I've never been dressed up like this before. I've never
[Guest]: worn jewelry before. My hair has never been parted in this way. I've never got a dupatta
[Guest]: with gold on my head before. And then suddenly, that moment that, God, you are her daughter.
[Guest]: And also, it is only subsequently that I seriously begin to set up home. I find that I need some
[Guest]: skills to be able to, you know, manage people who work in my home, to be able to manage
[Guest]: time and resources so that when people turn up, the kitchen is able to serve them. But
[Guest]: more than anything, it's when my third child is born. I actually went home to my mother.
[Guest]: I opened her jewelry kit. I took out the two rings that she had worn all her life, that
[Guest]: I kind of, that was the image of my mother's hand for us. We could recognize my mother's
[Guest]: hand because she was wearing these two rings throughout our childhood. I took them out
[Guest]: and I wore them. And I looked at them because now I needed the strength that this woman
[Guest]: had that I had never recognized. What does it take to raise three independent children
[Guest]: in the kind of circumstances in which she is, you know, through the best years of her
[Guest]: life, diminishing herself for fear of offending other people, or just being forever correct,
[Guest]: forever obedient, forever available to other people so that everything is smooth and her
[Guest]: children are safe. So it really did take my own journey as an adult, as a parent, as a
[Guest]: person who finally began to build a home independently, to see that I needed all of my mother's strength
[Guest]: and all of her skills to be able to do even what she had done, leave alone to do it better
[Guest]: than her, as I had always imagined myself.
[Amit Varma]: So this diminishment of herself, was it like a conscious strategy in the sense that this
[Amit Varma]: is the best way for me to get by in these times in these circumstances? Or is it something
[Amit Varma]: that women happened, allowed to happen to themselves without even thinking about it.
[Amit Varma]: So you might never think that, oh, my God, I want to do something else. I wish my life
[Amit Varma]: was different. And this is so oppressive. Or do you simply get into your groove and
[Amit Varma]: you play your role. And maybe somewhere there's an unexpressed sadness, and you don't know
[Amit Varma]: why it's there and you don't think about it and you hide it from yourself. You know, give
[Amit Varma]: me a sense of your mother's interior life, in the sense that you would, I'm guessing
[Amit Varma]: never have sensed it at the time. But subsequently, you could have gotten a sense of it just by
[Amit Varma]: sort of following in her tracks, but in a different time, like when it comes to having
[Amit Varma]: three kids, like did your conversations change, especially after that phase where she says,
[Amit Varma]: I never knew you could think so much. And then you're both mothers. And I guess you're
[Amit Varma]: both talking to each other. How did it change? Did the conversations change? What glimpses
[Guest]: did you get of her through that?
[Guest]: It's a very interesting question. Do women do this consciously? Or do they just kind
[Guest]: of, you know, do they think I have to do this to survive? Or do they just kind of do it?
[Guest]: It's definitely both. You know, one of my, I have a very young friend, she's probably
[Guest]: just touching 30, newly married. And the other day, in a conversation, I mean, even before
[Guest]: a conversation could start, she broke down a little bit. And she said, no one asked me
[Guest]: to become small, but I did it myself. She said, no one asked me to serve him. No one
[Guest]: asked me to put him first. I'm just doing it myself. And because she's truly a 21st
[Guest]: century girl, she has the self awareness. She, you know, she's two generations ahead
[Guest]: of me. And yet she is. So she's in a space where she's trying to figure out how much
[Guest]: of it is her choice, because to reject, you know, a corporate job or a nine to five, is
[Guest]: also in many ways, a choice of self care. But when you reject that, and what is the
[Guest]: groove that you choose? And what is the groove that without choosing you kind of fall into?
[Guest]: And then what do you do? How do you stay in it and not stay in it? Because we are also
[Guest]: at the same time, in love, building a home, building a family, imagining what it will
[Guest]: take to sustain our love relationships for life as we would like them to be. And yet,
[Guest]: you don't want, you know, all the unspoken hierarchies of patriarchy to land on your
[Guest]: shoulder and, and force you into something that you didn't want to choose. So how come
[Guest]: you're playing that role? So to some extent, it's a little, it's a combination of all these
[Guest]: things, you do internalize a lot of pressure, you do also want the rewards of the happy
[Guest]: married life, or the, you know, the couple who look like they're with it, you don't want
[Guest]: to be in conflict with each other all the time. And a lot of these reasons play into
[Guest]: some of the choices you make. What I find very liberating about having my mother, Sudha
[Guest]: as my mother, is that once we came into our teen years, and then later, you know, when
[Guest]: we were all in our 20s, and all independent as young adults, we began to see our mother
[Guest]: spend more and more time outside the company of children and, and, and her husband, and,
[Guest]: you know, not so, she had far more time because she didn't have to make tiffins for us or
[Guest]: iron our clothes or, you know, organize anything for us. And then we see the side of her as
[Guest]: a friend, we see the side of her who spends more time with her siblings, we see the side
[Guest]: of her who is supporting other people in the community that she lives in. And then I look
[Guest]: at my mother and I say, how come I never met this woman before? Because she's a great friend.
[Guest]: She's a very resourceful person. She laughs really loudly. She's a great conversationalist,
[Guest]: but none of that is something that I have witnessed within the family. And then you
[Guest]: realize that, you know, she never really taught, you know, she didn't really allow it to sit
[Guest]: on her. And Amit, because we're spending time on this, I'll just share this with you. One
[Guest]: of the big conflicts I had growing up is my father, my father, you know, he's an he's
[Guest]: he's your regular Indian male and father. So he, there are episodes of rage, he expresses
[Guest]: anger very easily. He's the only one who has the permission to express anger in the family.
[Guest]: And Papa would, whether it was about marks or about being late for something or just
[Guest]: not being absolutely perfect in front of guests, Papa would lose his temper every now and then.
[Guest]: And as a as a as a teenager growing up, I would both be confrontational as well as be
[Guest]: deeply hurt. By this, I would internalize it, I would, you know, moan for days, not
[Guest]: speak to anyone, not come to the dinner table, I would act out as the daughter, you know,
[Guest]: a non submissive daughter of an angry father. And one of the things my mother used to say
[Guest]: to me a lot was, why do you take him seriously? Why do you let his words get to you? He doesn't
[Guest]: mean it. Don't you get it? He doesn't mean it. And I'd be like, what do you mean? He's
[Guest]: my father. He's my father. How can I not take him seriously? How? And it has taken me two
[Guest]: decades to finally understand what she meant. And I wish I could convince my children of
[Guest]: the same thing. But I know that they will also learn in their own time. But I get it
[Guest]: now. I get it that if somebody is in a rage, you separate yourself from his expression,
[Guest]: you do not at that moment, stick yourself into what you think is your primary relationship
[Guest]: with this person. You can change the situation by walking away. All she was able to say to
[Guest]: me was, don't let it get to you. And I'd be like, maybe you can cope, but I'm too
[Guest]: sensitive. I can't. And I would just kind of, you know, stand in it and frustrate her
[Guest]: by stewing in the juices of my anger and my grief. But now I understand what a fantastic
[Guest]: coping mechanism, what a, you know, psychologist would probably have a nice fancy name for
[Guest]: it, a nice technique of, you know, separate yourself. You can't change his reaction, but
[Guest]: you can change your own reaction. It would be, you know, one of the things the Buddha
[Guest]: said or something, which is something that she was trying to tell me. And of course,
[Guest]: you learn when you learn. But now I understand that the reason she's such a fabulous old
[Guest]: woman with more energy than I have ever had in my life, that she's able to be available
[Guest]: to each of her grandchildren, she is able to be available to her daughter-in-laws, to
[Guest]: her daughter, to her friends and siblings, is because she was able to protect her core.
[Guest]: And she had somehow the inherited wisdom, perhaps, or her own innate wisdom to bide
[Amit Varma]: her time. You know, and there's something to learn from it. Yeah, I mean, I can imagine
[Amit Varma]: young people today saying bide my time, I won't bide my time. But what choice did you
[Amit Varma]: have back then, right? You have to, you're kind of imprisoned where you are, and you
[Guest]: just kind of make the best of it. And, and, you know, in many other, in many other kind
[Guest]: of contexts, we would see it as good strategy. You know, in a corporate context, we would
[Guest]: understand it, in a two party system, we would get it. You know, you don't have the tools
[Guest]: or the resources right now, if you attack, you will be destroyed. So you do bide your
[Guest]: time. And that's a smart thing to do. You know, there will be a time when this when
[Guest]: your adversary will be diminished by age by, you know, other loss of resources. And you
[Guest]: must save yourself for that time. It's probably what nature also does. And, and, you know,
[Guest]: it's not a weakness, it's, it's actually a strength.
[Amit Varma]: And does another kind of strength come from the solidarity of women, that, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: sisterhood of women, as it were, that you can speak to other women, and you even if
[Amit Varma]: you don't talk about these things, overtly, there is that shared experience, and therefore,
[Amit Varma]: this innate understanding of what you're going through. And you can stand by each other,
[Amit Varma]: like I recently did an episode with Farah Bashir, I don't know if it'll release after
[Amit Varma]: this or before this. But she spoke about her experience of growing up in Kashmir. And in
[Amit Varma]: what was essentially when she was a kid, what was essentially a conflict zone, there was
[Amit Varma]: constant curfew, there were bunkers outside houses, it was a mess. But what we kind of
[Amit Varma]: speculated on was that there is a great scope for a very strong female solidarity between
[Amit Varma]: different women, because all of you get each other. But a similar thing is not possible
[Amit Varma]: for men, because men are never opening themselves up to other men in that way. You are never
[Amit Varma]: expressing your vulnerability, you are never expressing how emasculated you might feel
[Amit Varma]: where in a conflict zone, you know that you can't protect anyone, really, you are as much
[Amit Varma]: victim as anyone else, and all of those things. And I guess that this sort of solidarity,
[Amit Varma]: the sort of sisterhood, and the role of female friendships would be even more important in
[Amit Varma]: your mother's time, of course, and perhaps can cut through generations, because you and
[Amit Varma]: her can be friends now. But would also be important for you in your own life, that there
[Amit Varma]: are people who just get you. And there are also male people who will never get you, right?
[Amit Varma]: And you have to kind of work your way around that. So what are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Yeah, definitely. There are female solidarities. And you know, even a lot of those know how
[Guest]: to stay invisible. Because if they become visible, patriarchy will intervene. And you
[Guest]: know, you'll be told, I don't like that friend of yours, she talks too loudly. Why do you
[Guest]: have to spend so much time with so and so? You know, what's it? Just casual, negative
[Guest]: comments like that. And all through my mother's years in Bhilai, in Ranchi, in Calcutta, in
[Guest]: Delhi, through our various homes, there are two kinds of relationships that I have seen
[Guest]: her create constantly, both of which mildly irritate my father, and both of which I have
[Guest]: judged as well. One of them is always the friendship with the women in the neighborhood.
[Guest]: And it takes her no time. And clearly, it takes the other women no time to very quickly
[Guest]: exchange notes, see where the other person is, you know, where are your children? Where
[Guest]: is your husband? How are the in-laws? How far are your parents and siblings? I guess,
[Guest]: but I mean, like I said, she's a natural liberal. Her closest friends were South Indian women
[Guest]: who didn't, in Ranchi, who didn't speak Hindi so well, but, you know, they were supporting
[Guest]: each other with their little children and their kitchens to manage in this kind of amazing
[Guest]: way that they continue to be in touch. She's had friends from across communities in India,
[Guest]: wherever we have lived, she has instantly made friends. The other is with working class
[Guest]: people. So the Sabziwala, the Andawala, the domestic worker, my mother has a natural affinity.
[Guest]: I mean, it always surprises us, because of course, we are snobs. And, you know, we've
[Guest]: been silly and self absorbed in our growing up years. But very quickly, she knows which
[Guest]: village this person is from, you know, whether the family is here or there, how is he supporting
[Guest]: him? What are the other jobs he or she is doing? So when the Sabziwala needs a loan,
[Guest]: when my father's old scooter needs to be sold off, when the garage needs to be given off
[Guest]: to a tailor who has no other means, when the maid's daughter needs an abortion, when somebody
[Guest]: else is facing domestic violence, has a small child, needs an Aadhaar card, my mother is
[Guest]: the hub. She's a little, you know, civil society office, where her doors are always open, her
[Guest]: heart is always open and her whatever resources she has even monetarily, she will open to
[Guest]: them. And sometimes she'll tell me in a low voice, your father doesn't even know how many
[Guest]: loans I've given that will never come back. But that's my that's how I, you know, I manage.
[Guest]: He will not approve, but she's managing out of the household. And that, then when I see
[Guest]: the trajectory of my career and my choices and my repeated kind of interaction with NGOs
[Guest]: or with, you know, civil society groups or with activist groups, then I realize whose
[Guest]: daughter I am, you know, it kind of that that connection gets made, that it is, it is, we
[Guest]: may not have seen it with our open eyes. But this is what we have witnessed through the
[Guest]: years, that whatever, you know, whoever is interacting with the family is getting some
[Guest]: kind of support from her, and therefore a kind of natural affinity for the week, despite
[Guest]: whatever her own limitations might be. I don't know what it is about my mother that makes
[Guest]: her such a heroine with my children. But it does surprise me. I don't know what they know
[Guest]: about her. I don't know what they innately feel from her about her. I mean, they know
[Guest]: her as a much older person, then then we have known her. And we feel like she doesn't make
[Guest]: gulab jamun anymore. She doesn't bake anymore. She doesn't make butter chicken anymore. So
[Guest]: my children have missed some of the best years of the great mother, the great mother. And
[Guest]: yet they are so, you know, for them, she is the perfect, the perfect person, in a sense.
[Guest]: And so was, so was their dadi, who was also kind of running this family empire in her
[Guest]: quiet way, sitting in one place, and just making sure that all the children are fed
[Guest]: and everybody's safe. And unlike their parents never having a meltdown. So I suppose, hopefully
[Amit Varma]: we'll get there too. Maybe, maybe parents are just a means for grandparents to finally
[Amit Varma]: enjoy children. In the sense, I guess, you know, when you're a parent, there's just too
[Amit Varma]: much pressure, there's so much going on, you know, you are going to have meltdowns, you've
[Amit Varma]: got a million thoughts in your head. But when you're a grandparent, you are like chill,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so no wonder the grandkids would like you and for the grandkids also, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you are the sort of cool elder figure, but someone who won't bark orders at them or tell
[Guest]: them to go clean your room and all of that.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah. And that kind of, you know, kind of loving nurturance, consistently loving
[Guest]: nurturance. I guess parents are destined not to be able to do it. And what this reminds
[Guest]: me of, of something that I used to feel a lot about raising our third child, I would
[Guest]: often feel when she was very little that with her, I'm like a grandparent. I have given
[Guest]: up my delusion of control. I am no longer trying to shape her into this perfect little
[Guest]: human being. She and I can just lie on the floor, make jigsaw puzzles, walk through the
[Guest]: park, feed the dogs. We really are much more chill because, you know, I've been there done
[Guest]: that with the older kids.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so your first two kids were really practice, you really got there with the third kid.
[Guest]: Hopefully.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So I, you know, I'll come back to your career and everything that we're doing. And
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to, you know, stick too much with your family or birth as it were. But
[Amit Varma]: I was intrigued by a couple of things that you wrote about your brothers, Bhai and Manu,
[Amit Varma]: as you call them. And one of them is really interesting. And I want you to elaborate on
[Amit Varma]: it where you say, quote, Bhai who is older is a novel I might write one day. Manu, our
[Amit Varma]: funny serious kid brother, is my collection of short stories, stop quote. What do you
[Amit Varma]: mean? It's so fascinating to me, one person being like a novel, the other person being
[Guest]: like short stories.
[Guest]: With Manu, who's my younger brother, it's been a very easy relationship. We've, I mean,
[Guest]: if we fought, it's, you know, just fighting like children, like, tu merko kitna mar sakta
[Guest]: hai, dikha, then we are beating each other up or some such thing. But it's been, it's
[Guest]: been, it's, yeah, I mean, he really is, he's, he's, he's the sister I never had. You know,
[Guest]: we are, we are very close, and we are very supportive of each other in a very quiet way.
[Guest]: And every time my executive functioning fails, I don't know what SIP to buy, I don't know
[Guest]: what to do with this money in my savings account, or I need to fill a form or I need to send
[Guest]: a proposal, I'll just land up in his office or send him an email, I'll just hand over
[Guest]: my work, he'll do it. If I have to buy a new phone, I just have to tell him and it will
[Guest]: appear. Bhai and I had a very conflicted relationship for for some time. We are now very close.
[Guest]: And it was very difficult to tell the story. And that's why I imagined that when I do discover
[Guest]: what the story is, it will be a novel, because it will span over time, it will have so many
[Guest]: characters, it will have so many, you know, meandering arcs, there will be so many other
[Guest]: things that will happen. For years, we lived lives that were, that did not interact with
[Guest]: each other. We've had many of these long interludes, where we haven't been in touch, you know,
[Guest]: you know, in an everyday way. And yet, when I wrote this, Bhai and I had not got back
[Guest]: in touch in the way that we now have. For the last five or six years, he's been going
[Guest]: through a very difficult divorce, a very, very painful custody battle. And finally,
[Guest]: because of, you know, the only person he was talking to in this time is me. It's like a
[Guest]: homecoming, in a sense. And I guess looking back, because of the home, in which we were
[Guest]: growing up, where Dadaji could have a meltdown anytime, where Papa could go into a rage at
[Guest]: any point. Bhai and I were fighting for the same resources. And we were both too deprived,
[Guest]: in a sense, perhaps for the same things. And the same mother was stretched over us. I needed
[Guest]: protection, he needed protection. I think she chose rightly by choosing him over me
[Guest]: for a very long time, because I can't imagine him not having even that. But so we were,
[Guest]: I mean, I used to call him my other brother. Everyone knew I had a brother. Everyone knew
[Guest]: Mannu, all my friends would know Mannu. And then they'd say, there's another one. And
[Guest]: I'd say, he's my other brother. And we literally had othered each other from our lives. But,
[Guest]: you know, but the connection is very strong. And in one of his therapy sessions, he won't
[Guest]: mind me sharing this, when he was trying to figure out, you know, how to cope with his
[Guest]: divorce and with having very young children. His therapist is talking to him about his
[Guest]: childhood. And it comes out that his sister's suicide attempt is the one big trauma that
[Guest]: he's stuck with, that he has never spoken about, he has never processed, but he's holding
[Guest]: on to the fear of what might have happened. And that makes him, you know, that kind of,
[Guest]: so his therapist kind of takes him back to the most vulnerable moment in his life and
[Guest]: begins to work from there, which makes him call me. And, and, you know, then we have
[Guest]: conversations. I mean, there's been a couple of years in between where we have spoken every
[Guest]: day for hours. And it's quite convenient, because it's the end of his day in San Francisco,
[Guest]: and it's the beginning of mine. And we can just do, you know, before my day starts, we
[Guest]: can spend time with each other. And because we've spoken so much about childhood and parents,
[Guest]: he'll often say to me, did we grow up in the same house? Because while I have coped by
[Guest]: holding on to every memory so that I can process it when I am more capable, he has coped by
[Guest]: forgetting everything, or most of it. And sometimes I have to remind him, or he'll read,
[Guest]: he'll read, you know, he'll call me after reading a column, and he'll say, did we have
[Guest]: the same mother? If she said this to you, why didn't she say this to me? It would have
[Guest]: been very useful if she had said this to me. And so it's in our, you know, late 40s, we
[Guest]: have been able to reconnect. And therein, perhaps is a very complex story that would
[Amit Varma]: become a novel.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And what you said about remembering things differently, you also have a quote
[Amit Varma]: in your book where you write about your brothers, we are oral historians of each other's lives.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And when I read that, I thought, okay, but they're different oral histories, because
[Amit Varma]: that's just the nature of memory. Like one of the fascinating things I've learned about
[Amit Varma]: memory is the way it works in the brain is that the first time we remember something,
[Amit Varma]: we're remembering the event, the next time we are remembering the remembering of it.
[Amit Varma]: So to remember something for a long time is really like a game of Chinese whispers. And
[Amit Varma]: for two separate people, you can have the same starting point. And even that same starting
[Amit Varma]: point, of course, you're looking at it from different vantage points. But then it just
[Amit Varma]: becomes something different, which goes back to that earlier think of how we can never
[Amit Varma]: truly know anyone else, because it's really what you feel is shared may not be shared
[Amit Varma]: after all. But leaving that random thought aside, let's go back to your career, where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what was through all of this, we've spoken about all these relationships, all
[Amit Varma]: of these people, what was your conception of yourself developing out to be? Like, even
[Amit Varma]: if you had decided that you're going to avoid the trap your mother fell into, for example,
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, not have to make those kind of compromises, what do you see yourself doing
[Amit Varma]: in future? How much of what you went on to do was a natural, intentional pathway? And
[Amit Varma]: how much was just one thing happened after another and you got there?
[Guest]: Some things have been very intentional in the in the initial moment. You know, so, when
[Guest]: I had completed my MA in Mass Communication, and this is 1995, the golden year of private
[Guest]: news in this country. Aaj Tak and the News Tonight are these two shows that have just
[Guest]: started on Doordarshan, half an hour show a day. And there are no trained video journalists
[Guest]: in the country because we, outside of Doordarshan, there was no news coverage, video coverage
[Guest]: of the news. So, it was golden in the sense that we had jobs before we even completed
[Guest]: our MA. Half my class had jobs. Barkha Dutt is my classmate from Jamia. And she went and
[Guest]: joined NDTV. She went on a shoot. This is Feb 95 or Jan 95. She went on a shoot. She
[Guest]: worked with a camera person. She felt like she was not being taken seriously. She came
[Guest]: running to my house in the evening and she said, we have to make your CV. She writes
[Guest]: it out. We go to the market, we get it typed because this is pre-printer and pre-computer.
[Guest]: We get it typed on a typewriter. The next day she gives it in at work so that she has
[Guest]: some but she has a friend on the news floor. And then, you know, because we had worked
[Guest]: together quite closely as students. So, I was a somewhat oppositional kind of young
[Guest]: person at that time. I looked at everything that I was not supposed to do and asked the
[Guest]: question why. And I wouldn't take a no for an answer unless it could be proven that the
[Guest]: no is what I had to live with. So, I enjoyed my two and a half years of mass communication
[Guest]: a lot. And I, you know, when I first worked with cameras, the still cameras, as well as
[Guest]: the film cameras, I never saw myself as a person who was interested in technology. But
[Guest]: this was the first technology that I just felt like it was a part of me. I just took
[Guest]: to it and it worked for me. It would obey what I wanted to say. I used to feel like
[Guest]: I couldn't learn to drive. I was not a great cyclist, but this thing worked for me. So,
[Guest]: I said to myself, I want to be a camera person. And everybody said, well, of course, you can't
[Guest]: be women. Don't become. Why don't you become an editor? Why don't you become a reporter?
[Guest]: You write so well, you can do this. And I said, no, I want to be a camera person. And
[Guest]: either somebody will hire me as that or I will not join this industry. And my first
[Guest]: interview with a wildlife filmmaker was a disaster. And my second one was with Pranay
[Guest]: and Radhika. And when they asked me if I could do it, I said, I don't know, I've never done
[Guest]: it. And they said, well, would you like to start? And I said, yes. So, it was a very
[Guest]: intentional choice to become a camera person, to choose to become a camera person. Then
[Guest]: I had to honor my choice and whatever hard work and dedication and struggle and the acquisition
[Guest]: of a thick skin it took to last in the field to work in a department of only men, in a
[Guest]: department of all male camera assistants, all male equipment in charges, and a large
[Guest]: number of male reporters, whatever it took. I mean, it was a good time. There was a lot
[Guest]: of support within the organization. One thing happened after the other in the sense that
[Guest]: I thought I would work for a couple of years and then find more meaningful work. But I
[Guest]: did and I worked in NDTV for 13 years, because it just always continued for those 13 years
[Guest]: to be meaningful. Whatever we demanded in terms of meaning we were able to get within
[Guest]: the workplace. If we said, I don't want to cover politicians, I want to do feature stories,
[Guest]: you could do it. If you said, I want travel, you could do it. If you said, I want to do
[Guest]: longer documentary, you did it. I had children. I became an editor for some time. So, yeah,
[Guest]: it worked. And eventually, because I had done a little bit of everything over the years,
[Guest]: I became the head of training in the organization. And so, it was both intentional as well as,
[Guest]: you know, good luck fate, a good time to be a good professional, in a sense.
[Guest]: I would say my second career run has been of becoming a columnist and then kind of becoming
[Guest]: an author with my books. I didn't imagine this happening. And this time, I didn't have
[Guest]: a friend writing a CV for me and sending it off to a newspaper. So, I was quite diffident
[Guest]: about making any move by myself. But the internet was a wonderful and generous place. If you
[Guest]: wrote consistently on it, sooner or later, you built a network. And of course, I got
[Guest]: read by Roger Ebert, you know, which was an amazing twist of fate. And then when he began
[Guest]: to kind of amplify what I was writing, when he began to praise it, it caught the notice
[Guest]: of journalists in India. And that's how I began to write columns in the Indian Express
[Guest]: and then the Mint Lounge. After that, it became very intentional. In that sense, I didn't
[Guest]: know how long I could write. I didn't know how long I would be allowed to write what
[Guest]: I had chosen to write. But by that time, because I had been through three pregnancies, my third
[Guest]: pregnancy was another instance of a near-death experience of nearly losing both me and the
[Guest]: baby and surviving that. So, I had in a sense had, I often, jokingly, I call it my third
[Guest]: eye opened and then I couldn't close it. It was like you could just see things that you
[Guest]: didn't see earlier. And now you just, you couldn't do anything about it. You could see
[Guest]: through people, you could see patterns, you could make connections and there was no going
[Guest]: back from there. But with the lounge column, Amit, it kind of became like, you know, what
[Guest]: you said about the podcast when we were chatting a little bit earlier. It became a labor of
[Guest]: love. It became something where I set the standard. I set the challenge level. I allowed
[Guest]: my inner voice to guide me towards what would come out next without getting into what will
[Guest]: be viral, what will not be, what's more acceptable, what's likely to sell more, without any of
[Guest]: those things. And I think that just like your experience, the reason it worked, the reason
[Guest]: it became resonant was because it stayed authentic to myself. And perhaps that's all you need
[Guest]: to do. But it takes a longish journey before you can come to that point where you can identify
[Guest]: or give voice to the authentic within you, in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: I think it took us long journeys to get to just having the courage to be authentic. And
[Amit Varma]: then after that, realizing that it actually works. And I try to save my writing students
[Amit Varma]: that journey by just telling them that, look, this is the one thing that you possess, that
[Amit Varma]: like, if you think about what is the one thing you possess that the other 7 billion people
[Amit Varma]: in the on the planet don't possess, it's you. That's what you have. That's the only thing
[Amit Varma]: that makes you stand out. And part of it is that if you're authentic to yourself, only
[Amit Varma]: you can be you and it comes out. And the other part of it, the other aspect of it is that
[Amit Varma]: we are all on more or less the same kind of journey in different ways at different parts.
[Amit Varma]: To write about that with honesty makes everybody relate to you. You know, I can relate to so
[Amit Varma]: many of your columns about parenthood, even though I'm not a parent and have no interest
[Amit Varma]: in becoming one and I hate kids, but I can still relate to so much of it because it's
[Amit Varma]: turning the gaze inwards. In fact, this is, you know, I was reading a bunch of Roger Ebert's
[Amit Varma]: film reviews recently. And of all film reviewers, he is closest to my heart because he would
[Amit Varma]: cut through, you know, all the superfluous stuff and he would get to the heart of a film.
[Amit Varma]: And the heart of a good film always is how it reaches the heart of the human experience.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So films that I love, I sometimes discovered them through Ebert and sometimes I'd go back
[Amit Varma]: and read what Ebert has written about Decalogue or Goodbye Solo or a lot of other great films.
[Amit Varma]: And it is so moving, you know, even without watching, even if you haven't seen the film
[Amit Varma]: in question, it is so moving. And I can guess how that would have attracted him to your
[Amit Varma]: writing to begin with, because it is that same unflinching gaze where you are clearly
[Amit Varma]: at that moment, not second guessing the audience. How can I impress people? How can I, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you're just putting yourself out there in that act of honesty. And I'll come back to
[Amit Varma]: the craft of writing in the column a bit later towards the end of the episode. But to kind
[Amit Varma]: of go back to the chronological arc and to get back to the subject of relationships.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me also about how you met your husband, as it were, because it seemed, because it's
[Amit Varma]: a very interesting sort of unconventional story, not just in the backgrounds being different
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, but that for the longest time, you didn't really you didn't, you know,
[Amit Varma]: decide that you were going to get married. You know, it's one of those things that kind
[Amit Varma]: of happened. You sort of you speak about how you, you know, broke up many times and got
[Amit Varma]: together again. And at one point, you wrote, quote, neither of us knew how to be married,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And this whole process of kind of understanding each other, discovering how
[Amit Varma]: to be married, and then figuring out that within that, you're almost like strangers
[Amit Varma]: and then discovering each other again, and negotiating and renegotiating all of those
[Amit Varma]: is sort of a fascinating kind of process. And it comes before parenthood, which is,
[Amit Varma]: of course, a great adventure of your life from what, you know, from what I can see from
[Amit Varma]: the outside. But tell me a little bit about how you met him and you know, all of that.
[Guest]: Yeah, so we ran into each other in a friend's home. No, in his home, to be honest. Two of
[Guest]: my colleagues in NDTV and Avsel were housemates. So these three young men had a flat in Noida.
[Guest]: And what happens when you're young people and you have a whole flat to yourself, you
[Guest]: are hosting a party after party, get together after get together. It's the place where people
[Guest]: hang out, because no one else, you know, in that age group, not many people have an independent
[Guest]: home. And we're all always looking for places to hang out. At least in the late 90s, there
[Guest]: were not that many coffee shops and other public places. And of course, a home is always
[Guest]: a home. So it was a place, their flat was a place where there are a lot of NDTV parties
[Guest]: would take place, you know, this whole group of friends and colleagues who worked on a
[Guest]: morning show called Good Morning India, who were part of the camera department, who were
[Guest]: part of the news department, we were all the same age group, we had a lot of energy that
[Guest]: news television hadn't entirely taken out of us. So we would party there. And in one
[Guest]: of those places, one of those events, I walked into his house, I knew there was a third person
[Guest]: in that house. I had heard of someone called Mirza. I had in my imagination, I saw a certain
[Guest]: kind of man. And I met him. And I write a lot of what I call marriage columns. And so
[Guest]: I, in my head, I call it a marriage column, because it kind of comes every three or four
[Guest]: months. And I'm, in a sense, answering the same question, what's a girl like me doing
[Guest]: with a guy like him? What, you know, considering that there were going to be so many social
[Guest]: and familial barriers? What was it that made us and there are such stark differences. He
[Guest]: speaks a different language, he comes from a different family background. What, you know,
[Guest]: why did we kind of just stick around for so long? And I'm forever trying to answer that
[Guest]: question. And recently, I kind of, one day I wrote in my notes app, said my ADHD was
[Guest]: attracted to his ADHD. Because also post pandemic, a lot of us are, you know, getting more in
[Guest]: touch with our anxieties and with our own neurodiversity, we're beginning to recognize
[Guest]: it, find a language for it. I think that post lockdown pandemic COVID, a lot of it has become
[Guest]: exaggerated enough for it to be more visible to us. And yeah, so that was my latest theory
[Guest]: that it that you know, that it's our neurodiversity that kind of complemented each other. I have
[Guest]: no idea what you mean by neurodiversity. It, it, it refers to being on the, on the, you
[Guest]: know, that that all of us are on a spectrum. On the one side is being neurotypical, and
[Guest]: on the other side is being neurodivergent, and the conditions of having attention deficit,
[Guest]: you know, being attention deficit of being hyperactive, of having autism, of having social
[Guest]: anxiety, all of these, in some combination or the other position, a position on the spectrum.
[Guest]: And so, that is what makes some of us more sensitive than other people. That is it what
[Guest]: makes some of us find it so hard to fit in. That's what makes some of us party for some
[Guest]: of us become, you know, find it difficult to do simple things, when we can do complex
[Guest]: things very easily. And, and some of those connections. Recently, I've been kind of making
[Guest]: for myself for my children, and for him, and now he's reading a book on ADHD himself. And
[Guest]: saying, Hmm, this is me. So, our energy levels, I suppose, in some ways, and also, I guess,
[Guest]: if you put it in very simple terms, he was on the margin, not really fitting in, I was
[Guest]: on the margin, not really fitting in. And, and then you kind of gravitate towards each
[Guest]: other, because you find that although you belong very strongly to a certain social group,
[Guest]: you don't necessarily identify with the role playing that is required of you. And so, while
[Guest]: he comes from a very traditional, patriarchal Muslim home, he's the only son of a very important
[Guest]: father, he, he was rejecting all of the expectations that, you know, were placed on him as the
[Guest]: heir of his father as the only son of his mother as somebody who would study in a certain
[Guest]: way, go abroad in a certain way, you know, become upwardly mobile in a certain way. And
[Guest]: he just wanted to be free. And he was kind of practicing that very free life. And in
[Guest]: a sense, when I had chosen to be a camera person, when I had chosen to be part of this
[Guest]: very cool NDTV gang, but I was the girl in the baseball cap, you know, and Levi's jeans
[Guest]: and trekking shoes, because I had to carry heavy equipment every day, and I would end
[Guest]: the day being exhausted and not at all attractive looking by that time. But that was a choice
[Guest]: that spoke to me. And, you know, I was not doing the traditional role playing of a 23
[Guest]: year old or 25, four year old, urban kid with urban person with, with my kind of background.
[Guest]: And somewhere, I think, being unconventional in our own ways, wanting to live a little
[Guest]: more authentically kind of attracted us to each other. One of the first plans we made
[Guest]: together was to be part of a group that was going to drive from Delhi all the way to Spain.
[Guest]: Because we knew someone in Pakistan, and we knew someone in Turkey, and then we knew someone
[Guest]: in Spain. And therefore, we were going to, you know, and we would have these meetings,
[Guest]: and we would make these plans. And I even told my mother, I was going to do that. She
[Guest]: was like, okay. So yeah, you know, big dreams, crazy dreams, having being happy to think
[Guest]: about unattainable things. These are the kind of things that, that attracted us to each
[Guest]: other's company. We didn't know how to be married, because we didn't want to be married
[Guest]: in the, you know, we didn't want to be, we didn't have that very conventional idea of
[Guest]: ghar banayenge, savings hongi, you know, bachche honge, school jayenge. We didn't want to live
[Guest]: in that kind of mold. And, and, and, and that was very freeing. And so we would, we would
[Guest]: just do fun things together. And we didn't take the idea of marrying or being together
[Guest]: for life seriously. He certainly didn't take it seriously, because he was quite convinced
[Guest]: that he could not break his mother's heart. Of course, we discovered later on that his
[Guest]: mother was extremely happy to meet me. And her heart was, her heart was actually reassured,
[Guest]: because she had worried about how her son, you know, she was actually very reassured
[Guest]: to meet me, she said, Oh, you're another one of the same mold. And now, and now, you guys
[Guest]: are fine. You'll be fine together. Because, you know, you're not the kind of wife who
[Guest]: needs taking care of which my son might fail at and stuff like that. So, so yeah, it kind
[Guest]: of worked for us. And, and continues to the same things that attract us to each other
[Guest]: also become the reason for our conflicts, that the same high energy, the same constantly
[Guest]: embracing new projects and running off in whatever direction our interests take us,
[Guest]: you know, it can be quite chaotic. But it keeps us alive, and it keeps us happy. And,
[Guest]: and I guess the one thing we discovered about each other early was that we could be quite
[Guest]: supportive of the other person's eccentricity or unconventionality or, or dreams. I mean,
[Guest]: you can. And, and that I think we've been able to honor.
[Amit Varma]: I'm struck by what you said about, you know, one possible reason for the attraction being
[Amit Varma]: both of you on the margins, I was telling a friend recently, that sometimes if you feel
[Amit Varma]: you don't belong somewhere, rather than try to fit in, just look for other misfits, which
[Amit Varma]: is perhaps what you guys did. Another thing I'm struck by is is that, on the one hand,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you seem really sort of a misfit, and someone who doesn't particularly care
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, compromising too much to be part of this or that, or whatever, you're
[Amit Varma]: living an independent life, you're wearing trekking shoes and carrying heavy cameras
[Amit Varma]: around. But once you do get together with him, it's so important to you that you fit
[Amit Varma]: into his family, that you make a good impression that his family is your family, and that his
[Amit Varma]: village is your village. And you've, you know, written different essays about all of that
[Amit Varma]: you speak about how you first, you know, met his parents in a South Indian restaurant in
[Amit Varma]: a Delhi marketplace in, you know, your Christmas cotton suit and a bandhani dupatta, and all
[Amit Varma]: of that, and you really want to make an impression. And though the initial impression is mixed
[Amit Varma]: after that, you know, everything sort of works out. And there are these really intriguing
[Amit Varma]: lines where you write, some episodes carry a haze that I label as cultural confusion.
[Amit Varma]: The more we got to know each other's families, the more we discovered how different they
[Amit Varma]: were from the version we had reported to each other, stop code. And this goes back to the
[Amit Varma]: point you made earlier about memory, how we can remember different things differently.
[Amit Varma]: But it also goes like, you've pointed out how you would tell him things about his mother,
[Amit Varma]: and he was like, I didn't know that, right? And how he got along so well with your mom,
[Amit Varma]: and you were like, like, what the fuck? Why are you leaving me out of this? Right? So
[Amit Varma]: what was that urge? What was that urge? Which made you want to have a family? What was that
[Amit Varma]: urge? This other family? What was that urge? Which made you adopt his village is basically
[Amit Varma]: your village and your kid's village and all of that. So that's interesting, because, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I mean, we all contain multitudes, of course, but tell me a bit about this. And
[Amit Varma]: was this something you discovered in yourself over time? Or did it just come so organically
[Amit Varma]: and naturally that, you know,
[Guest]: that's, that's not a line I remembered, but it's a very interesting line, we discovered
[Guest]: that the versions of that each other's families were different from the versions that we had
[Guest]: reported to each other. Yeah, that truly was a fabulous honeymoon period. I had reported,
[Guest]: I had told him many stories about my other brother, and what an evil person he was. And
[Guest]: then he met my brother when he came and he was like, my God, he's such a wonderful guy.
[Guest]: He's so funny, such a gentleman. And look at you, you know, how you I can't believe you spoke
[Guest]: like this about him. So of course, it took him many years to get, he still, it's interesting
[Guest]: how he defends my family when he feels that I am being too harsh. And the worst disagreements
[Guest]: he and I have are when I feel that he's judging his family too harsh. And he's, you know,
[Guest]: he's not letting up when when he really needs to. And sometimes I'll step back and say,
[Guest]: why are we fighting with each other about this? That's your nephew, you figure it out.
[Guest]: You know, why are we disagreeing so hard about whether he's okay or not, and I'll usually
[Guest]: be defending him. So yeah, so there is, of course, where we are positioned. As young
[Guest]: single people, we are freshly free of our families. And therefore, you know, our rants
[Guest]: are at their kind of peak, in a sense, and we haven't faced any of the, what they say
[Guest]: jab bade hoge toh pata chalega. So none of the conflicts of actually living a complex
[Guest]: adult life have, you know, we have not really kind of lived that yet. But also, there is
[Guest]: so much about how you tend to judge people who are close to you, and how much you tend
[Guest]: to take them literally. And just like, I mean, when we did actually decide that we were going
[Guest]: to get married, and we made very elaborate plans of how we would have to leave the city
[Guest]: and maybe even the country and because nobody was going to agree and we would have to go
[Guest]: very far away to survive. And what happened was absolutely the reverse. We were, our immediate
[Guest]: parents were just waiting for the day that we would break the news to them. They were
[Guest]: completely out of patience. They just wanted us to figure it out and get on with it, in
[Guest]: a sense. So we were surprised to the point of shock to discover how keen his family was
[Guest]: to have me as his wife and how keen my family was to have him formally as their son in law.
[Guest]: And you know, and how much they were celebrating it. So they clearly knew more about us. And
[Guest]: what would, you know, what was good for us, than we were giving them credit for in a sense.
[Guest]: His mother was a very, very beautiful surprise for me. I made a lot of concessions to make
[Guest]: it easier for me, because I was going by his version of how, you know, she's a certain
[Guest]: generation, a certain age, has a certain set of expectations. So I'm tiptoeing around her
[Guest]: and, you know, trying to be, I would speak to her in, this became a family joke, I would
[Guest]: speak to her in Hindi. But, you know, she's an Urdu speaking woman. And when I said meri
[Guest]: saheli aane wali hai, wo nikat pahuch gayi hai. And Afzal was like, please speak in English.
[Guest]: This is ghastly. Can you say? Saheli and nikat being the problem word. Yeah, yeah. Can you,
[Guest]: you know, he would say, inki dost aane wali hai, wo paas pahuch gayi hai. And I was just
[Guest]: literally translating everything. And what was coming out of my mouth, when I tried to
[Guest]: translate every word, after years of being comfortable with English was my textbook Hindi.
[Guest]: And that just didn't, that sat so badly in this very accomplished Urdu speaking family.
[Guest]: And he would be embarrassed and say, just speak in English. If you know, when you can't,
[Guest]: when you can't find a word, please don't translate it. But also, you know, she came and stayed
[Guest]: with us for a while. And I would dress differently to go to work, at the cost of being mocked
[Guest]: by all my colleagues. You know, look at her, as soon as she got married, our girl in baseball
[Guest]: cap and Levi's jeans is coming in salwar kameez every day. But I got tired of it. And I think
[Guest]: in the second month, I came out of my room in trousers, and a blouse and my mother in
[Guest]: law looks at me and she says you look so good like this. And I was like, okay. Point taken.
[Guest]: She's just like, what, you know, all she was trying, she didn't know how to tell me that
[Guest]: you don't have to change in any way. Just for me, just calm down and relax and be who
[Guest]: you are. And the first time we had guests over suddenly, and I went into the kitchen
[Guest]: and tried to clumsily put together some kebabs, she she walked into the kitchen and she was
[Guest]: like my mother in law, she was so much older. I mean, my mother in law was like my grandmother
[Guest]: in a sense, because she was always dressed in white muslins and kept her head covered
[Guest]: like my nani used to. So she came into the kitchen and she was as clumsy as me with the
[Guest]: kebabs. And she said, you know, I've never cooked in my life. And it's okay, you don't
[Guest]: have to do it, do it either. And then we just giggled a bit, you know, this nearly 80 year
[Guest]: old woman and, and me, adult, clumsy bahu. And, and calm down about it. So yeah, she
[Guest]: she, she, she was, she was really amazing. I, I think that Afzal, actually, I had expected
[Guest]: him to be very nervous. At one point, I told him, I won't marry you, because you won't
[Guest]: talk to me when we go to the village. And he was like, what does that mean? And in my
[Guest]: head, what I meant was that you will become, you know, because I know, I know the, the
[Guest]: environment there is different. And, and then you will not be my friend, you will begin
[Guest]: to play a role. And she's the one who, far more than him or me, actually, foresaw the
[Guest]: pressures that we would feel and ease them for us. And, and when our first daughter was
[Guest]: born, we had three daughters over the years, she's the one who she stood, you know, like
[Guest]: in the front line. And she was like, anybody say anything rude about my granddaughters,
[Guest]: you, you, you know, I, you talk to me first, no, nobody's going to hurt them or say anything
[Guest]: bad about this whole gender drama. And it was immensely protective of me. And really,
[Guest]: it was like an antidote to what my own village and my own kind of family background had prepared
[Amit Varma]: me for, in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: And what is also lovely here is that she's actually, you know, anticipating in advance
[Amit Varma]: the way that you're feeling and reacting to that. And it's okay, you don't have to cook
[Amit Varma]: or you look so great in those jeans, and so on and so forth. And I imagine the reason
[Amit Varma]: you and Afzal might have seen her differently, is that in his memory, he would remember her
[Amit Varma]: as she would have been as a younger person, a younger mother, perhaps stricter, less chilled
[Amit Varma]: out, and I guess age kind of changes you like that. So that's sort of...
[Guest]: And also, it's the same thing as Sudha, in a sense, you know, that innate wisdom of knowing
[Guest]: what is good for this other person, never kind of spelling it out and saying, you can
[Guest]: marry anyone you want. But, but knowing that, if my son is in love, then this is what will
[Guest]: sustain him. And that's, you know, that's what I want as a mother for him.
[Amit Varma]: You've written many columns about marriage, and they're very interesting, and I hope young
[Amit Varma]: people read them. And I was struck especially by this para in this piece you've written
[Amit Varma]: called a welcome note for new husbands and wives. And the para goes, quote, do not be
[Amit Varma]: in a hurry to become one of these a husband or a wife. Take your time, change your mind
[Amit Varma]: many times. Be suspicious of prefabricated labels and roles. Be prepared to be inventive.
[Amit Varma]: Even when you do get married, do not go running towards a quicksand. Slow down, amble around,
[Amit Varma]: check out the new terrain at your own pace. Participate in the costume drama that Indian
[Amit Varma]: marriages are, but see yourself as an intern. Be a part timer in the beginning if you need
[Amit Varma]: to hold on to all your other commitments and loves. Love more than just people, stop quote,
[Amit Varma]: which is such a lovely para. And I hope many young people read that. And you also sort
[Amit Varma]: of have another piece called good marriage is a terrible burden. You know, where you
[Amit Varma]: talk about how it involves fighting, it involves letting go of fights, you don't have to keep
[Amit Varma]: up an appearance that we are the ideal couple. Sometimes you just have to express yourself
[Amit Varma]: and and it's okay to do so. And at one point, you quote this lovely phrase used by a therapist
[Amit Varma]: to you, the housekeeping of your marriage. Right? So take me a little bit through all
[Amit Varma]: of this, because somehow in Indian culture, in Indian society, you know, there are these
[Amit Varma]: grooves that everyone goes down upon. I'm just using that phrase again and again today
[Amit Varma]: for some reason, that, you know, it's kind of understood, you're going to get married
[Amit Varma]: and you're going to have kids. And, you know, and this is what a marriage should be like.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a husband's role. And this is a wife's role. And what you describe in great
[Amit Varma]: detail is that no man is problematic. It's messy. But you have to take bring the same
[Amit Varma]: intentionality towards it that you take towards anything else, like you could be intentional
[Amit Varma]: about an aspect of your career about learning something about whatever. And a relationship
[Amit Varma]: is not a thing that just is what it is, you have to work and shape it the way you want.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how you're thinking on this evolved and what your experiences
[Guest]: were like.
[Guest]: I think what helped was our variness, you know, towards the idea at all, not wanting
[Guest]: to have to fall into the conventional roles. At one point, our therapist had to hold our
[Guest]: hand and actually remind us that we had been so very, that we had become distant. And that,
[Guest]: you know, when he says, Do you call him your husband? And I said, No. And he said, Maybe
[Guest]: you should. You guys are not being able to support each other in the way that you need
[Guest]: to now that you have children. So don't not ask him for help. Don't be so, you know, you're
[Guest]: isolating yourself and then you're feeling disappointed in each other. So he was kind
[Guest]: of helping us to get closer to each other. The variness, it's useful for us because it's
[Guest]: so mutual. You know, neither he nor I want to change the other person, neither he nor
[Guest]: I want to become a lesser version of ourselves. And yet, having children together and wielding,
[Guest]: you know, the extended families as they have been has also taught us that you, you know,
[Guest]: take it slow. You're not going to realize everything at the same time. There's a time
[Guest]: for everything. And it's all right, if for this particular event, you need to be quieter
[Guest]: or dressed in a certain way or, you know, or just play a little bit of a role. It's
[Guest]: not that big a deal. But in the in the spaces in which you are together, remember to, that's
[Guest]: where the housekeeping thing, she actually said to us, she said, come back every year
[Guest]: for the housekeeping of your marriage, you know, meet each other as separate individuals
[Guest]: again and and see what it is that you want to say to each other that everyday spaces
[Guest]: don't often give us the space to do. And it was very useful because nothing in our culture
[Guest]: ever says that to us. No, it's for keeps. Now there's no going back. There's no rethink.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not like if you're having an open conversation about expectations, you
[Guest]: are rethinking the marriage. It's not like you're letting go of the relationship, but
[Guest]: it's just it's as if all those spaces close. And that's what does us in, in a sense, that's
[Guest]: that's where, you know, it doesn't work or it only works for one of the two who is kind
[Guest]: of getting away with all the goodies while he or the other one is left with almost, you
[Guest]: know, is feeling depleted over the years. And so, yeah, I mean, having access to therapists,
[Guest]: having met them independently, when we were not married, when we were wondering whether
[Guest]: we should marry, when we were trying to figure out our own individual issues of growing up,
[Guest]: and then being able to go back again and again in a safe way has been something that has
[Guest]: that has been very, very supportive for us.
[Amit Varma]: And it also strikes me that a spouse is a moving target in the sense that we change
[Amit Varma]: throughout our lives. Like I look back on who I was 20 years ago, and I was a completely
[Amit Varma]: different person. And I think that's true of pretty much everybody to some degree or
[Amit Varma]: the other. And the danger is that you can end up with the fixed image of someone in
[Amit Varma]: your head, this is a person I married or whatever. And that fixed image will then come with fixed
[Amit Varma]: expectations. And it's not always like that, like, I think, in the same way that, for example,
[Amit Varma]: your husband had a particular image of his mother, which is not the person you met. And
[Amit Varma]: similarly, you had a particular image of your brother, who was perhaps not the person that
[Amit Varma]: Afzal met. And there's a danger that you can have an image of each other and that can get
[Amit Varma]: ossified. And it strikes me that this whole act of intentionality of doing this housekeeping,
[Amit Varma]: really kind of helps keep that fresh. So you know, there's a great column of yours, which
[Amit Varma]: I won't quote from at length, I'll just, I'll sort of link to it where you speak about five
[Amit Varma]: things to learn about marriage, and I'll quickly read them out. And if my if listeners are
[Amit Varma]: intrigued, they can just go and read the full thing. But I found great wisdom in them, especially
[Amit Varma]: number five. Number one is learn to fight, then learn to feel at home, then learn not
[Amit Varma]: to be offended. Learn to be a gracious host. And finally, drink tea and do nothing. You
[Guest]: want to elaborate on the last one? Yeah, yeah. I learned this from him entirely. And the
[Guest]: columns called five things to learn from your spouse, right? So drink tea and do nothing
[Guest]: was a great, great and very shocking kind of lesson to learn. It also became one of
[Guest]: the many reasons that I'm going to kind of add it to why did we get together. So I come
[Guest]: from this insecure, middle class workaholic family, where what my father tried to embed
[Guest]: in us was kind of a, almost a slavish mentality, you know, that there will always be a boss,
[Guest]: and you have to be the best worker possible. And that's how he has lived his, his his life.
[Guest]: But that was, you know, that's the great thing about new generations, right? They completely
[Guest]: reject the premise in the first place. And, and it's, it's because of the privileges that
[Guest]: you have given them to your own children, that they are able to dream of a completely
[Guest]: different world. So it can be a little bit of a shock for parents, that, you know, you
[Guest]: use the education I wanted you to use in this way, to become a social activist, that was
[Guest]: not what I wanted from you or a camera person that doesn't fit. But but that's what children
[Guest]: do. And that's a great thing. That's a great thing that every new generation does. But
[Guest]: so just to come back to the point, what, always being busy, always working hard, getting up
[Guest]: in the morning and having a sense of purpose and just always being kind of focused on something
[Guest]: to that has outcomes was something that I kind of come from that background. And for
[Guest]: a for a man who's grown up in a landowning family in a, in a village, and, you know,
[Guest]: from a certain privileged background, and yet a small town life and a village life,
[Guest]: to have these moments where you honour each other, you honour each other's presence in
[Guest]: your life by just being together and not necessarily having anything to do, but just being in each
[Guest]: other's company. And that, you know, in the larger scheme of things is a way in which
[Guest]: people stay connected. It's a way in which people are able to give support to each other.
[Guest]: And sometimes when there's no language, in which we can celebrate or grieve or share,
[Guest]: just that just those moments of quiet and that shared cup of tea is a, I would say even
[Guest]: a healing space. I'd never had tea before I got married to him. Having tea was a waste
[Guest]: of time. And so I really, I had not, I had no patience for anything of the sort. But
[Guest]: living with him, I'd known him for years, but living with him meant that the morning
[Guest]: started with a slow cup of tea, you came together in the evening with another cup of tea, sometimes
[Guest]: after breakfast, you had, you know, you added tea, if somebody came over, there had to be
[Guest]: tea. And you didn't have to achieve anything, you know. So now we've got these spaces where
[Guest]: the phone is away, the computer is in the other room, you're not attending to anything
[Guest]: in particular, but it's a moment to relish with each other. And I've learnt the gift
[Guest]: of it in a sense. And our children have, we've been able, it's one of the things we've been
[Guest]: able to do in the family that whatever happens, we are together at mealtime. Sometimes he's
[Guest]: not at home, and I'll ask one of the children who's going to make me tea and make me tea.
[Guest]: And it's just a place where wherever you are in your separate spaces, even if you're in
[Guest]: the same home, you gather for a moment. So it's a little bit of what therapists would
[Guest]: call circle time, or, you know, a listening circle or something like that, where you're
[Guest]: not looking for an outcome, you're just looking for a connection. And some of these things
[Guest]: are kind of worth nurturing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm not much of a tea drinker. In fact, I don't like tea, but I'm more of a coffee
[Amit Varma]: person. But as a metaphor, for a certain state of mind, a certain kind of terror, it really
[Amit Varma]: works nicely for me to disconnect from the world and just, you know, do your thing, except
[Amit Varma]: that I find that you can disconnect from the world in terms of actually doing something.
[Amit Varma]: So I may not be writing something or, you know, working on an episode or working on
[Amit Varma]: whatever, but the mind is, there are still crazy monkeys gambling around in the mind,
[Amit Varma]: right? So how does one sort of deal with that? Because I think to do the kind of work that
[Amit Varma]: you do when you write your essays or whatever, you know, I'm guessing that you need to have
[Amit Varma]: that quiet space where you can sit down and do your work. That's far harder for a woman
[Amit Varma]: than for a man, obviously. And, you know, I get a glimpse of that where at one point,
[Amit Varma]: your husband says, I have to go to Amritsar, will you come with me? And you say, yeah,
[Amit Varma]: let's go. And then suddenly you realize that he's including the children in the plan. And
[Amit Varma]: you're like, why, why are you doing this? You know, it's a, you know, I'll have to look
[Amit Varma]: after them, and there'll be so much work. And that work would have been more or less
[Amit Varma]: done by you, no matter how progressive the man is, right? So for women to find that,
[Amit Varma]: that kind of quiet space, those long periods of what Cal Newport calls deep work is much
[Amit Varma]: harder. So what are the kind of mechanisms you deal with? And you've seen other women
[Amit Varma]: deal with where you actually have that time to yourself and that luck, because you know,
[Amit Varma]: there's a house, there's a husband, there are three kids, how have you sort of managed
[Amit Varma]: to sort of figure that out?
[Guest]: Multiple things. One, I really had to give up on perfectionism. And that was my, it was
[Guest]: a much needed lesson. You know, especially when I began to work from home. It's much
[Guest]: simpler in the office, because someone else has watered the plants and kept everything
[Guest]: clean. And there's this quiet army that comes at night, and everything's in place, and you
[Guest]: just do your work. But you start working from home, and you don't have that quiet army,
[Guest]: or that quiet army looks at you and says instructions for the day and stuff, plus your growing children,
[Guest]: plus an extended family from, but definitely his side where there's no boundaries, anybody
[Guest]: can come turn up anytime, any kind of plans can happen. So it took me a while. And I have
[Guest]: now I've kind of damaged a few psyches on the way. But to give up on the idea of everything
[Guest]: being perfect, looking perfect, and that being a reflection of my efficiency and my aesthetic,
[Guest]: you know, so now I've come a very long way. If I've got a quick Zoom meeting, I'll just
[Guest]: look at the background, whatever is behind me, I will throw behind the computer, have
[Guest]: a neat background, do my meeting later on, I'll put it in the other side. So giving up
[Guest]: on this idea, which is also a, you know, a housemaker's burden. How is her house looking
[Guest]: and I just, I mean, social, socialization teaches you, certainly your mother teaches
[Guest]: you, sasural mein ye na bole ki maa ne sikhaya nahi, kind of line, and you internalize yourself
[Guest]: also, I'm this person whose house is just so perfect all the time. That was an idea
[Guest]: that I had to give up both to be able to have a compassionate relationship with my children,
[Guest]: whose job it is literally definition of their existence is to keep things not in their place,
[Guest]: but all over the floor, etc. And that's what it means to be a child in a home. So for that,
[Guest]: for that sake, and for the sake of being able to have mind space and energy to be with my
[Guest]: work, which is very, very important to me, as it is to everyone. Yeah, so that was one.
[Guest]: Another is that, like, I've really been enabled by my family, naturally by my children. So
[Guest]: if I say mama has to do this, and I need your help, and you know, so they'll, they'll,
[Guest]: they'll do it. They're very, very sensitive to my needs. When I have, when I have learned
[Guest]: to express them, I had to learn to express them, I had to learn to ask for help. And
[Guest]: they are always there. And then by Afzal. And because we live these very different work
[Guest]: lives, we do find we constantly find that both of us or either of us has started a new
[Guest]: project that the other person has no idea about, because he's also traveling a lot.
[Guest]: So suddenly, he'll be doing something and I'll be like, you forgot to tell me and he'll
[Guest]: be like, didn't I tell you? And it's already too far gone. And now it's going to affect
[Guest]: my life and we have to figure it out. And similarly with me. So when I started writing
[Guest]: my column, he was not at home. When I, I mean, many, many of the things, I think we've remained
[Guest]: loyal to the idea of enabling the other person to do what they need to do. And he more than
[Guest]: me almost has a, I don't know what other term to use, because I'm not familiar with the
[Guest]: any other idea paternalistic pride in what I do. I mean, I almost feel like it's my father
[Guest]: beaming over me. You know, when he'll read something and he like it, or he want to celebrate
[Guest]: something that I've done well, or I have completed or, you know, so, so certainly there is, there
[Guest]: is that is a that's a huge thing. And, and I think it's also been helped by the nature
[Guest]: of my writing. I mean, just in the same way that my mother was able to read it and say
[Guest]: mujhe nahi pata tha tu itna sochti hai. And suddenly, she was able to understand years
[Guest]: of her daughter's inexplicable anxieties or needs. When she understood that, oh, this
[Guest]: is how she's processing things. Therefore, she had these needs. For him also, I think
[Guest]: somehow we almost communicate with each other, via writing, in a sense, you know, there is
[Guest]: a little bit of a homage to the relationship to the family, what's in all, you know, with
[Guest]: our with full honesty, but a desire to make sense of how we can be so much in love and
[Guest]: yet so much in conflict. And somehow writing it down kind of helps to communicate things
[Amit Varma]: that are otherwise not so easy to bring up over tea.
[Amit Varma]: One of the interesting things about, you know, your narrative, your story, is that you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that Afzal didn't really want kids, that he was chill, he was like, nah, I'm not gonna
[Amit Varma]: have kids. And you on the other hand, like when I think of you and correct me if I'm
[Amit Varma]: wrong in this characterization, but you seem someone driven by parenthood. It is not something
[Amit Varma]: that happened along the way or that happened in the routine course of things. But you're
[Amit Varma]: driven by it. It was your project. It was your labor of love before your columns, perhaps.
[Amit Varma]: And you went into it with great determination and intentionality and enthusiasm and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. So take me through sort of this process of discovering in yourself, someone who wanted
[Amit Varma]: to be a mother and, you know, and persuading Afzal to cooperate in this project.
[Guest]: Yeah, didn't take a lot of persuasion. Yeah, I can certainly say that this, it's almost,
[Guest]: you know, in one of my workshops, we were making a list of creative desires and some
[Guest]: people wrote raising a child. And I think it's a pretty accurate, you know, description.
[Guest]: It is a, it's a talent that takes nurturing, but and it's also a desire. It's, you know,
[Guest]: one of the things we can build, can create, can do, you know, just like we create other
[Guest]: works of art is, you know, is another human being with all humility and mindfulness of
[Guest]: one's limitations and their individuality. But it does, it is, there is a creativity
[Guest]: to it. I just, I always had it. But I also remember that the first time I had a breakup,
[Guest]: I must have been 19 or 20, serious heartbreak. And one of the first thoughts in my mind is,
[Guest]: I'll have a child one day. And perhaps because of this lingering sense of not belonging,
[Guest]: this sense of not fitting in, perhaps a hope that one, that's where one will find home.
[Guest]: That is a relationship that will root me or give me the purpose that I seemed to not have
[Guest]: in a natural way, otherwise. And even when Afzal and I broke up very seriously, one of
[Guest]: the last times that we did, and we moved countries, and we were never going to meet again across
[Guest]: continents, etc. You know, when I thought, okay, what next? And I, I thought, okay, I'll
[Guest]: take a few years, and then I'll adopt a child. I, you know, that the child remained, that
[Guest]: I will, and then I thought of Sudha. Sudha will help me. I know that I can't do this
[Amit Varma]: without her.
[Guest]: This time she'll get it right.
[Guest]: With or without her husband, I can't do this without her, that I had figured out. And it's
[Guest]: true that I, you know, she was there for me throughout. So it's, it's a recurring image
[Guest]: and a recurring thought that I always kind of had. Did I have to convince him? We just,
[Guest]: we just got pregnant with our first child, and there was no looking back. It was just,
[Guest]: yeah, I mean, that's the way his, that's the way his, his decisions get taken. He's like,
[Guest]: it's a hard no. And then suddenly, it's a yes. It's how we got pets. Never gonna get
[Guest]: pets. Okay, let's get a dog and a cat together. We're never gonna move. Okay, let's move here.
[Guest]: So yeah, I mean, that's how we got married also. But, but once, once our first child
[Guest]: was born, it just he, he, he was fascinated. He was holding her, I think, on the fifth
[Guest]: or the sixth day, and he was like, I feel like I'm holding a little Natasha in my hand.
[Guest]: And I thought what an amazing expression of love is that for both of you, that he's feeling
[Guest]: love for her because he thinks he's holding me, a version of me and, but there's been
[Guest]: no looking back. I was a little bit in shock when we were pregnant for the second time,
[Guest]: I felt like I didn't have enough time. I just wanted to be with this child. But for him,
[Guest]: it was like, well, and then yeah, we got pregnant the third time. And then we were mindful about
[Guest]: not getting pregnant. But yeah, it was, it just kind of flowed.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things you write in one of your early columns is about how it was so incredibly
[Amit Varma]: far from what you expected that you know, you at one point where you know, she'd be
[Amit Varma]: crying and all of that you point out how you know, your husband, your mother and you had
[Amit Varma]: a handy checklist to figure out why the baby might be crying like a checklist manifesto.
[Amit Varma]: And you write quote, it went like this one is she hungry, two needs to be burped, three
[Amit Varma]: has a wet nappy, four wants to be rocked to sleep, five is a nose blocked, six back to
[Amit Varma]: square one, stop quote, and it almost seems like, you know, it's that panic sets in at
[Amit Varma]: that point. And then you write these beautiful lines where you write quote, I now know that
[Amit Varma]: parenting is not just about creation, creation comes later. It is about destruction first,
[Amit Varma]: the soundless collapse of your own ego, saying goodbye to the self that you were before the
[Amit Varma]: first pregnancy, redefining an identity, stop quote. So tell me a bit about this soundless
[Amit Varma]: collapse of the ego, like, does it panic you? Do you have, say, buyer's regret or mother's
[Amit Varma]: regret at some points where you think that shit, I didn't know it would be like this,
[Amit Varma]: what have I gotten myself into? So tell me a little bit about like that, because about
[Amit Varma]: what it was like, because I'm imagining that once parenthood is upon you, and especially
[Amit Varma]: for a mother, once motherhood is upon you, everything is changed forever. There's no,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it's just changed forever. It's a fork in the road. And it's, it is what it
[Guest]: is.
[Guest]: To all new mothers, I want to say yes and no. It does change forever. And then it comes
[Guest]: back. And that's, that's the amazing thing about, you know, the second life or the or
[Guest]: the multiple lives that you kind of come back to. And, and I can say that with great confidence,
[Guest]: because I'm living that now. You know, this, I feel like I have this huge creative energy,
[Guest]: and I'm able to literally do so much more than I had ever done before. And I hadn't
[Guest]: imagined that I would recreate myself. But to go back to the soundless collapse of one's
[Guest]: ego, it would make me cry, you know, in despair, but not in remorse. And I know, I know from
[Guest]: reading other women's testimonials, I know from my friend's experiences, that not everybody
[Guest]: is ready for it. And a lot of women are not able to cope in, particularly in the in the
[Guest]: early time. I did have a really difficult time, which is natural. It's called nani yaad
[Amit Varma]: aajana. Literally.
[Amit Varma]: And your nani used to come in your dreams, as you mentioned somewhere.
[Guest]: You're thinking if one child has done me in like this, and you know, now imagine nani
[Guest]: in her ninth pregnancy and all her children in, you know, under threat of life and she's
[Guest]: carrying on. So, so yeah, take it slow. You can do this. This has been done before. But
[Guest]: I am glad I wrote all this because it's very important to be realistic, because it is absolutely
[Guest]: true that mothers forget everything. They literally, I mean, there's no way they would
[Guest]: have the second or third child if they remembered how hard it was. They forget everything. And
[Guest]: then that's very, that's not good to the women who are coming after you and saying, well,
[Guest]: nobody told me and you're like, well, you know, I tried. But there was never, never,
[Guest]: I mean, I just prepared myself really well for it. The ego thing was also, you know,
[Guest]: you're so competent. My first child is born and I'm 32 years old. And I'm almost peaking
[Guest]: in my broadcast television career. There's nothing I can't do. I can carry two cameras
[Guest]: across the oceans and, you know, film, all kinds of things. I can set up equipment. And
[Guest]: I am helpless in the face of this baby and these engorged breasts. And I, you know, I'm
[Guest]: just my body's not cooperating. I don't have the skills. So, so that kind of going from
[Guest]: hero to zero is, it's part of the process. And you really kind of need to accept it,
[Guest]: but also surround yourself with as much support as you can, in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: And over a period of time, like I imagine a kid comes out and it's a project. Like you
[Amit Varma]: said it earlier, it's an act of creation. It's a creative activity. So it's out there.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing is, it's more than a project. It's a person. It's its own project. In certain
[Amit Varma]: senses, you'll become its project at one point in time. You know, and through this time you're
[Amit Varma]: writing about them repeatedly, but and that writing is useful to remembering like something
[Amit Varma]: that you said in our last episode, which I remember is that, you know, what the act of
[Amit Varma]: writing about your kids did is that if something happened to one of them, and she was a 13,
[Amit Varma]: you would know from your notes that hey, she felt the same way when she was six or she
[Amit Varma]: felt the same way when she was two when you might otherwise have forgotten and it helps
[Amit Varma]: you kind of get a sense of that or get a narrative of that. So this sort of examination that
[Amit Varma]: you're doing, how, what was that process like when you begin to understand that aspect of
[Amit Varma]: their being persons and not projects that they have an interior life of their own. You
[Amit Varma]: know, at one point, you wrote about one of your kids snapping back at you when you snapped
[Amit Varma]: at her, right, which took you by surprise. You're like, what, you know, because that's
[Amit Varma]: not what kids do. And, you know, at different points in time, you're sort of surprised by
[Amit Varma]: how kids sort of, you know, react to the world like you write about Aliza at one point quote,
[Amit Varma]: she would also celebrate the world as if it had just been invented, right, which is also
[Amit Varma]: charming in the sense that it also can make us reflect on our own jadedness when we see
[Amit Varma]: that look of magical recognition in someone's eyes or magical curiosity. So what has that
[Amit Varma]: process been like through the years that these are not just your kids, they are people they've
[Amit Varma]: got interior lives of their own, they look at the world differently than you would imagine.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes they open your eyes to yourself in a way that you would not have imagined.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely. I mean, you've put it so well. That realization that they have interior
[Guest]: lives that really came to me with our second child. I was pretty happily delusional about
[Guest]: the fact that with my first born, who was this absolutely perfect baby, we had conversations
[Guest]: all the time, even before she could talk. We were just always with each other. And so
[Guest]: it was easy for me to believe that she was an extension of me. And my second child didn't
[Guest]: look like me, didn't eat like me, and really had a mind of her own, very distinct needs,
[Guest]: desires, expression from the beginning. And sometimes I would look at her and wonder how
[Guest]: what was going on. There was almost like sometimes not recognition in my eyes. But it was also
[Guest]: an early initiation into, you're not raising her, she's raising herself as well. And you
[Guest]: might need to rethink a lot of your ideas. And I found that to be a really, really wonderful
[Guest]: journey of unlearning. And, and I'm glad I, you know, my that my children challenged me
[Guest]: by being different, challenged me by having a meltdown if they couldn't explain to me
[Guest]: what was not okay with them. And, and, and kind of, by the third time, I was, like I
[Guest]: said before, quite mellowed, and I just followed her around, I just, you know, allowed her
[Guest]: to lead. Because she was so good at being a child, she was so perfect, she would, you
[Guest]: feed her, you dress her, and then she follows her path, and you just have to go down with
[Guest]: and there's an album in which she's walking down the road. And I'm just literally photographing
[Guest]: her as she goes like a feral cat. You know, she's sitting here, she's sitting there, she's
[Guest]: got food on her face, but she's absolutely at peace. And, and I, and I reached that place
[Guest]: with her. The wonderful thing, Amit, is that you're going to relive it again and again
[Guest]: and again. You know, the same child at 14 is writing in an essay, even those closest
[Guest]: to me don't realize that I am not the same person that I was earlier. You know, so, so
[Guest]: you got to catch up. It's just constantly there will be a new person. And just like
[Guest]: my mother is always trying to catch up with me. And she'll often tell me, mujhe toh Instagram
[Guest]: se pata chalta hai ki ab tu kya kar rahi hai. Or so and so told me that you are now doing
[Guest]: this project. And, and similarly, I mean, I'm not going to have any other privilege.
[Guest]: I'm also going to be following our children. And they make you realize that again and again.
[Guest]: I am, because I am overconfident. So every now and then I feel like I've caught up. Now
[Guest]: I'm we're on the same page, and then they're on their own meandering route. So their teenage
[Guest]: years are have been very interesting, and I'm sure they'll continue to be for a while.
[Guest]: And, and then in that sense, I'll just add that the unschooling life works for us. Because
[Guest]: whichever way our interior life is going, we're still close by and able to find, you
[Guest]: know, however much we may drift away from each other, we are able to connect again and
[Guest]: again, because we're there.
[Amit Varma]: This act of sort of, like, whenever we discover something new, and I guess, being a parent
[Amit Varma]: is you always, once you figure out your kids aren't playthings, you're, you know, discovering
[Amit Varma]: them a new at different points in time, like you said, and the typical way of trying to
[Amit Varma]: understand something new is with reference to the old. And one thing that that might crop
[Amit Varma]: up there, one danger of that is that you become the center of everything, like one of your
[Amit Varma]: daughters warned you that it's not about you, you know, and that's a natural way of trying
[Amit Varma]: to understand that somebody is melancholy at 12. And you obviously your mind will go
[Amit Varma]: back to when you were melancholy at 12. You know, you'll try to figure it out that way.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes you can't, sometimes it, you know, they are individuals, they are different
[Amit Varma]: from you in certain ways. They are, you know, different things are happening to them. And
[Amit Varma]: sometimes you just have to kind of let it go like an absence of the ego, as it were
[Amit Varma]: that you crush your ego and you let it go. And is it the case that the sort of easiness
[Amit Varma]: in the parenting of your third child Naseem was because you were able to let that go?
[Amit Varma]: Because when she is ambling down the road going here going this, you don't have the
[Amit Varma]: instinct of saying, hey, don't go there or come in, you know, you're just watching it.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a kind of love there that is, that is something pure and detached, you know,
[Amit Varma]: not that the love before for the other two is any less, but this has that sort of detachment,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there's a lovely love song by Warren's even in his last album where he speaks of
[Amit Varma]: a breakup. And he's talking about this person who's left him and he's saying, I'm happy
[Amit Varma]: for your happiness, you know, that situation where your ego is not kind of there.
[Guest]: There's an almost, I would use the word surrender, you know, that it's really not about me, I'm
[Guest]: just reveling in your presence. And that I was able to do a lot with Naseem. Also, I
[Guest]: was, she's the only child after whose birth I am at home. I don't have to go back to work.
[Guest]: You know, so I am, I have figured out a way to, I gave myself a year's maternity leave.
[Guest]: I said, I'm your boss. Then I said, I give you another six months. Because with the other
[Guest]: two, I'd been in a job and I'd got six months each. And it was great. But yeah, I was able
[Guest]: to do that. And it's this whole journey is actually this conversation is kind of revealing
[Guest]: so many things to me, as we talk, and especially as you comment on some of the things. So with
[Guest]: the same Naseem, for example, she grows up and she does have a much more complex, you
[Guest]: know, kind of interior self. And the experiences that she has in the world are not something
[Guest]: that we can anticipate or imagine. And however much I try to control them, by choosing this
[Guest]: school, that school, volunteering this, that, staying in touch, I am not able to. And, you
[Guest]: know, it takes sometimes a year or two years before she opens up about something that hurt
[Guest]: her. And it's, and I find that now. So while that will continue to happen, one will not
[Guest]: always be able to, you can be there, but they will go on their own journey, they will experience
[Guest]: things absolutely differently. They are living in a different world. And they have different
[Guest]: sensitivities that because we may have either dulled hours, or we may not have them at all,
[Guest]: we are not able to imagine. And therefore, we are not able to imagine their hurts or
[Guest]: their pleasures or their joys. An aspect of this, an additional aspect of this is that
[Guest]: we are almost like a team of caregivers for each other. So I get a lot of clues about
[Guest]: how to respond to the youngest from the oldest. You know, I'm also watching how, with fascination
[Guest]: actually, how the sisters are sometimes compensating for each other, sometimes protecting each
[Guest]: other sometimes expressing to me about the other, you know, and it was in the in the
[Guest]: early, early years, Naseem, she was the youngest and there were there were times when she would
[Guest]: get frustrated and pick up something and attack her sisters. And it must have happened a couple
[Guest]: of times when they came to me and said, well, she's misbehaving. And I would say, well,
[Guest]: she's small, let it be etc. So they complained to me, they said, you never say you never
[Guest]: tick her off. So I said, Oh, my God, did I make a mistake? So I take this feedback seriously.
[Guest]: And the next time it happens, I tick off the little one and the little one shrivels. And
[Guest]: then these two are like, how dare you do this to her? That's not what we asked you to do.
[Guest]: And I'm like, okay. And in a way, that's also very reassuring. Because while I'm the irrelevant
[Guest]: judge and empire, who, who should be there, but should not overdo her role. They're also
[Guest]: kind of very clued into each other. And unable to support each other, you know, in the absence
[Guest]: of what parents and fill fill the gaps that parents can't reach.
[Amit Varma]: Also beautiful. Tell me about how you know, you're writing about them. You know, your
[Amit Varma]: sort of live blogging your motherhood as it were, how that how that changes the way that
[Amit Varma]: you relate to each other, like at one level, I can imagine that it's actually positive,
[Amit Varma]: because you're examining yourself much more and you're being self critical and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, what's, you know, another positive is that perhaps they pick that up
[Amit Varma]: from you, that act of not don't just go through life like an automaton, but question everything,
[Amit Varma]: think of everything, think about other people and what they are feeling and all that. So
[Amit Varma]: those are great. But at the same time, then there can be this sense that or whatever we
[Amit Varma]: do could be written about mama will write about this, or she'll write about that, or,
[Amit Varma]: you know, they might even be sort of a performative sense to it, where they want to be recorded
[Amit Varma]: in a particular way. At one point, you quote Nassim saying, quote, take a photo of me eating
[Amit Varma]: butter. Right. And perhaps she was just trolling you or just being sarcastic or whatever. So
[Amit Varma]: at one level, there is this heightened self awareness and empathy. But at another level
[Amit Varma]: to them, you know, there might be this weariness also. So how has all of that played out?
[Guest]: I have been I have, you know, I have kind of kept all of this in mind of constantly.
[Guest]: And one of the one of the things that I've done is try to be as accurate as possible
[Guest]: in the writing and and not try to solve problems, not not look not right to not necessarily
[Guest]: close an essay, you know, not not necessarily find a closure to end an essay. And a lot
[Guest]: of them just so it's it is a feedback that I get a lot like, but you just finished you
[Guest]: stopped in the middle or what happened next or, you know, I want more. And I'm I'm kind
[Guest]: of staying with the moment. And if there is no lesson to be drawn from it at that time,
[Guest]: I won't draw it. They have always read everything that I've written. They are finicky about
[Guest]: accuracy. And if I say blue, when I should have said pink, then they will, you know,
[Guest]: they'll remind me and particularly if I if I've got an age wrong, if I've written 12,
[Guest]: and I should have written 12.8 or I mean, any of those small details. So now, I make
[Guest]: sure that I kind of ask them to proofread and to check. But there was a time when they
[Guest]: were too young to do that. And so some of the ways in which I'm doing this is talking
[Guest]: only about my experience or talking, you know, from a perspective of how I felt of trying
[Guest]: to understand what the other may be going through without passing judgment or without
[Guest]: being over sure of whatever they may be doing. And it seems to have worked in that sense.
[Guest]: But there's no substitute to knowing that this is my responsibility and carrying it
[Guest]: to as much of an extreme as one does. And in a sense, Amit, you know, this is about
[Guest]: family, but we often write profiles of other people, you know, as writers, as journalists,
[Guest]: we represent people who are, do not have access to the same platform and could not cannot
[Guest]: write their own story. But their story must be told. And we and one is mindful in the
[Guest]: same way that you don't want to. Your writing must not in any way be condescending. It must
[Guest]: not take away the agency of the person. It must not make assumptions for them. And we
[Guest]: do that simply. I mean, one of the very simple ways in which we can do that is just extreme
[Guest]: accuracy, extreme accuracy to facts, to dialogues, you know, to what one felt in the moment.
[Guest]: Not guessing what they may be feeling, but what I felt when I heard this or when I saw
[Guest]: this. And I guess those are ways in which one has gone forward and literally never writing
[Guest]: about anybody who is an adult without, you know, sending it to them, getting them to
[Guest]: read it, talking to them about it, asking them about each thing and making sure that
[Guest]: that is all, that is all done.
[Amit Varma]: At one point you write, and this really struck me, where you say, quote, In all this, though,
[Amit Varma]: there has been a most unexpected gift, the wisdom of children. Kids remind us what we
[Amit Varma]: were like when we started out, what we can be like and what can be reclaimed. As Aliza
[Amit Varma]: once put it gently, quote, I know everything already, but you have forgotten some things,
[Amit Varma]: mama, stop quote. So tell me what you learned from your children. What did they teach you?
[Guest]: Um, you know, you use the word jaded, no, the ideas of hope, justice, of just being
[Guest]: nice, of being happy in the moment, all of that just kind of, you don't have to do anything,
[Guest]: it just kind of begins to fall back, you know, fall by the way, in many ways, and especially
[Guest]: being so much out in the world as journalists or as activists, justice is an idea that is
[Guest]: very difficult to hold on to. And you almost begin to believe that, that there is no right
[Guest]: that, you know, that nothing is going to go right, and I can do nothing about it. And
[Guest]: really, conversations with children always remind me that there is something I can do
[Guest]: about it. That there is, you know, that this is the right thing to do, and this is not.
[Guest]: And I'll often kind of unravel my own doubt or dilemma with one of my daughters, especially
[Guest]: the youngest, who's very good at saying, no, I think you let this be, but you do this.
[Guest]: You can do this and that they will like it.
[Amit Varma]: Is there an example of that you can think of?
[Guest]: So I'm, you know, let's say visited a home in which, after the violence in Delhi in 2020
[Guest]: in Mustafaabad, because we were also based in Delhi as a group, very quickly, we were
[Guest]: able to visit some of the victims. And some of them are in shock, some of them are saying
[Guest]: things that may, you know, make them look bad, or they may not want those things. It
[Guest]: might be inconvenient for those things to go on record for them at a later time, because
[Guest]: they need to claim compensation, or they, adults have many reasons why they may want
[Guest]: to change their version of what has happened to them. And yet we need to tell the story
[Guest]: because we need to tell the world that this is happening. And I'm wondering how to do
[Guest]: this. And she says to me, were there any children there? And I say, yes, there were. And she
[Guest]: said, what were they doing? Why can you write about that? And just like that, I'm like,
[Guest]: if I just describe five children I saw in a refugee camp, I can tell this story without,
[Guest]: you know, compromising anybody else. And, and it's just, just this image, because she's
[Guest]: a child, she's thinking, what about the children? You know, where are they? And, and she also
[Guest]: asked me what happened to their animals. And one of the women was wailing about her goat.
[Guest]: She said, I went back and because I had left my goat behind, and she didn't find the goat.
[Guest]: The goat was burnt to death. So, to be able to then, you know, she made me realize that
[Guest]: that animal's life mattered. Because I was overwhelmed by the scale of what we had witnessed,
[Guest]: and I didn't know where to start. And I didn't understand, you know, I was feeling like,
[Guest]: I don't have the tools to do this. And she just kind of took me, a little bit held my
[Guest]: hand and took me there.
[Amit Varma]: So there's a lovely post where you speak about the lessons you learned from parenthood. And
[Amit Varma]: again, I won't read it all out. Because if I wanted to quote the memorable bits, I'd
[Amit Varma]: have to read the whole damn thing out. But so it'll be in the show notes. But these are
[Amit Varma]: sort of the bullet points. And there are like five of them. And the first is trust children.
[Amit Varma]: Two, let your children protect you. Three, accept kids gratitude. Four, ask children
[Amit Varma]: for help. And five, love yourself like you love your child. And actually, I think these
[Amit Varma]: are all worth elaborating upon because they're all so interesting. So let's start with trust
[Amit Varma]: children.
[Guest]: Yeah. I wish that when my parents felt lost as, you know, now I look back at them when
[Guest]: they were raising us and we were eight, nine or 10. And they were like in their early 30s.
[Guest]: And you know, a person in their early 30s at this, you know, in this generation has
[Guest]: no particular responsibilities. Most of the time, we remember how much support we had
[Guest]: and how little they did. But I, you know, I wish that when they were in that kind of
[Guest]: lost vulnerable time, that they were, that they could turn to us and, and allow us to
[Guest]: help them or, or be, you know, be able to know that we would be fine with that, that
[Guest]: they that they that we had some tools that the children actually have a lot to contribute
[Guest]: to the family, particularly and to their parents well being also that it's not a one way street.
[Guest]: And from with my children, I was able to learn that. And, you know, this, this calling out
[Guest]: is something that my children do a fair bit. And I and I know that they are able to do
[Guest]: it because we don't quash their voices, you know, we do not react with how dare you speak
[Guest]: to me like that. We, whatever we do at that moment, if I'm able to then write about it,
[Guest]: you know, they know that I've taken it seriously. And I've, so yeah, to trust that they have
[Guest]: mechanisms by which they can cope. And that they, you know, if you're just there, they
[Guest]: will know when to ask for help. And that they can help you when you need help. That all
[Amit Varma]: three of those.
[Amit Varma]: Let your children protect you.
[Guest]: Yeah, pretty, pretty much.
[Amit Varma]: Pretty much. Yeah. Except kids gratitude.
[Guest]: Yeah. I find that that is something that we make, we really make this mistake a lot. You
[Guest]: know, we repeat these platitudes that we have inherited that are part of popular culture.
[Guest]: Kitna, kitna shatir hai, she's so clever, she's always trying to get something out of
[Guest]: me. To see children as manipulative is the popular narrative. And that is so rude and
[Guest]: inaccurate, both towards them, and towards the family itself. And we totally confuse
[Guest]: our children. You know, so when they do express gratitude, we'll be like, oh, he wants something
[Guest]: more from me. That's why he's being kind to me. And I've watched that constantly, particularly
[Guest]: when you're part of a large family, and you know, you have extended family get togethers.
[Guest]: And you'll be, it's so hurtful and so sad to see how moments of gratitude are just destroyed
[Guest]: to the point that that person is confused about themselves. They can only see themselves
[Guest]: after a point. They do have a very strong sense of self, but it gets overwhelmed by
[Guest]: what their adults tell them they are. It, you know, it just sits on top of it. And there
[Guest]: are fights I remember in which I have started with saying to my father, holding my ground
[Guest]: and saying, I want this. But if, you know, if an adult is constantly telling you that
[Guest]: you're selfish, you'll say, that may be selfish, but I'll still do it. And what have you done?
[Guest]: You may do what you want, but you've internalized that you're a bad person. And why would we
[Guest]: do that to our children? And you know, and then they're just going to play that role.
[Amit Varma]: Your fourth point is ask children for help, which you've already sort of elaborated upon.
[Amit Varma]: Fifth one is interesting. And I think one that can be sort of forgotten or not considered,
[Amit Varma]: which is love yourself like you love your child. Right. And, you know, you've spoken
[Amit Varma]: elsewhere about how, you know, in a different generation in a different context, you know,
[Amit Varma]: self sacrifice can be celebrated. You have a line somewhere in a different context where
[Amit Varma]: you say that, quote, there are those who will celebrate the sacrifice of women. I insist
[Amit Varma]: on calling out abuse, top quote, which is, I mean, it's a different context, nothing
[Amit Varma]: to do with motherhood there. But I think something that a lot of people don't, and I'm sure especially
[Amit Varma]: women don't do, is be kind to themselves, that they get into that role of motherhood
[Amit Varma]: and you're sacrificing everything and you're, you know, you're making the food for your
[Amit Varma]: husband and you're doing all the unpaid labor and then you're looking after the kids and
[Amit Varma]: it's, you know, and there's a lament there that a lifetime can go by, that having a kid
[Amit Varma]: is like the end of your life. Everything is over. You know, 25 years later, when the kids
[Amit Varma]: have grown up, you're too tired, there's nothing left. It's too bitter. Yeah. How do you reclaim
[Guest]: yourself if that self, you know, you have not preserved that self in some corner, even
[Guest]: when you were not able to care for yourself openly, if that's, you know, that, that energy
[Guest]: is destroyed or written over by bitterness and anger and, you know, all of these unexpressed
[Guest]: and negativities, then when the time comes when you can reclaim your creative energy,
[Guest]: it's, it's not there anymore. And my worry for Sudha, my mother, was that she didn't
[Guest]: have time for herself. And when she was neglecting herself, I was neglecting myself as her daughter.
[Guest]: And, and you really can't love your child unless you're loving yourself. And now, and
[Guest]: I think that she's able to be such a wonderful grandmother and such a support to me as an
[Guest]: adult daughter is because she preserved that part of her and now we're just seeing her
[Guest]: blossom. You know, when she has time and resources and she's not depleted by having to care for
[Amit Varma]: others.
[Amit Varma]: I think a great metaphor for this just thinking aloud is what they say on aeroplanes right
[Amit Varma]: if there's a pressure problem and the oxygen mask, they come down first put your own mask
[Amit Varma]: before the other person. Yeah, because otherwise you may be able to do neither. Yeah, it really
[Amit Varma]: is. Yeah. So tell me about now the whole decision of unschooling in the sense where you've already
[Amit Varma]: spoken near the start of the episode about why you decided to do that the problems with
[Amit Varma]: school and so on and so forth. But you know, how did the girls adapt to it? What does it
[Amit Varma]: really involve? Because a lot of people listening to this must be like, you know, they would
[Amit Varma]: have heard of homeschooling as some something that, you know, eccentric Americans do over
[Amit Varma]: there and individual freedom and blah, blah, blah. But over here in India, tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about the community of homeschoolers or unschoolers, as you put it out here. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how long did it take you to come to that decision? And what has the experience
[Guest]: been like? How are your girls taken to it? So I'd always been curious about homeschooling.
[Guest]: But we kind of seriously began to reread about it when our middle child was very distressed
[Guest]: about being able to go to school. And it had nothing to do with academics. She continued
[Guest]: to be involved with academics and be very excited about learning. It had much more to
[Guest]: do with not being able to cope with the socialization and the social aspect of school. And much
[Guest]: later, two years later, when our younger child also opted out of school, it was the same
[Guest]: thing. She loved the structure of school. She loved, you know, what she was learning
[Guest]: over there. But what was happening when the teacher was not in class or how the teacher
[Guest]: was reacting when she was not at her best moment, and those became very difficult for
[Guest]: her. And that's when we went and attended a Learning Societies Unconference in 2017
[Guest]: in Bangalore at the end of the year in Bangalore. And we found, you know, a large network of
[Guest]: families and people, not necessarily all of them were families. There were lots of young
[Guest]: people, a lot of single people, a lot of elderly people, people whose children were in school
[Guest]: or had opted out completely. And also people who had chosen farming or forest life, you
[Guest]: know, living away from the urban grid, in a sense. So they come together and through
[Guest]: over five days through various activities and various kind of loose ways of meeting
[Guest]: each other and exchanging information and sharing things with each other, you kind of
[Guest]: discover that there are so many other ways in which people are living their lives. There
[Guest]: are so many other ways in which people are learning whatever they want to do, how they're
[Guest]: combining their passions with something that is also financially viable for their family.
[Guest]: And so it was for the first time we were able to see that it can be done. And that these
[Guest]: are not, you know, people on the margins of society or like highly unconventional people.
[Guest]: They were just like us. Many of them had, you know, very conventional jobs themselves.
[Guest]: But for various reasons, they were responding to their children's need to learn in a certain
[Guest]: way. And it's both kinds of children. Some children are learning beyond their years or
[Guest]: they have special interests that school is not covering. Or some children are, you know,
[Guest]: learning at a very different pace. And how can we make space for the individual needs
[Guest]: of children? And by that time, our daughters were 12, 9 and 14. So we had to some extent
[Guest]: matured as parents. We recognized that each one has a very different energy level, has
[Guest]: a very different need for physical, analytical activities, and also socializes in a very
[Guest]: particular way, and is getting overwhelmed or traumatized by certain set patterns. So
[Guest]: how can we figure this out? And I also then began when I came back from there, I read
[Guest]: a lot of blogs by families. And some of the ones that I found very resonant were South
[Guest]: African, you know, women in South Africa, who had written about their families. And
[Guest]: then I began to kind of pick up words like unschooling, like digital natives, you know,
[Guest]: these children who are born in the internet age, parents who have been through schooling
[Guest]: and need to go through a de-schooling process to be able to understand because we may say,
[Guest]: okay, you don't have to go to school, but we can end up, you know, recreating the same
[Guest]: oppressive expectations in the home, just because you're not going to school, you still
[Guest]: have to wake up, you still have to do your assignments at a certain pace, and stuff like
[Guest]: that. And I read a lot of, a lot of parents, I saw a few videos, and I kind of came back
[Guest]: and whoever I had heard about, I read what, you know, what they had created. And I guess
[Guest]: that's, that's my self learning, I'll just kind of go into a topic and then read everything
[Guest]: that I can find on it. And, and then I realized that all our confusions, all our inabilities,
[Guest]: all our doubts about what is the next best step is, is really literally part of the process.
[Guest]: It's letting go, it's going to be a time of unlearning, a time for all of us to let go
[Guest]: of many of the expectations, primarily that you have to make children go through a certain
[Guest]: grind for them to become functional adults. And you know, that the fallacy of that, that
[Guest]: you can let them, you can, you can let them be who they are, let them claim their agency,
[Guest]: and that they will figure out a way. And also, then you kind of look back at your own life,
[Guest]: you look back at your own choices. Why did I quit full time work? How did I become a,
[Guest]: you know, a self taught entrepreneur or a writer? And how many projects did I start
[Guest]: and stop? What, where are my own life's learnings coming from? And you discover that many of
[Guest]: us are unschoolers by nature, you know, that many of us, we've gone through what we had
[Guest]: to go through, and then try to reinvent, rediscover, recreate ourself. And there's a lot of, there's
[Guest]: a lot of reclaiming of self esteem. There's a lot of reparenting of yourself that that,
[Guest]: you know, we do through our middle years, sometimes with therapy, sometimes with other
[Guest]: forms of self help, through our own communities. And why do we have to follow the same pattern
[Guest]: with children? Why, you know, why can we not let them kind of walk into the same claiming
[Guest]: of their agency at an earlier age? And it seems like a radical idea. It's a very, but
[Guest]: it's not, I don't think it is. It's not easy to live with. Because suddenly you're like,
[Guest]: do I wake them up or not? Do we still eat together or not? How much fixation on a particular
[Guest]: interest is too much? You know, if they are not exercising at all, then, you know, when
[Guest]: do you intervene? When do you not intervene? And, and it, it really does then became a
[Guest]: time of looking at your own life, your own choices, your own exercise routine, you know,
[Guest]: you're, and, and learning to be far more accepting of the ways in which we are unique. And, and,
[Guest]: and I think the one of the finest part of, of this whole unschooling journey has been
[Guest]: reclaiming my own uniqueness. You know, it's not just something I'm doing for my children.
[Guest]: It's, it's something that I'm also doing for myself. I'm, I am being able to see why I'm
[Guest]: good at, you know, a certain kind of interaction. Why I'm not so good at a certain kind of meeting?
[Guest]: What kind of choices do I need to make? What kind of ideas about myself can I now just
[Guest]: let go of? You know, it's, it's not necessary for me to prove to anybody, or to myself,
[Guest]: that I, you know, have certain efficiencies, I don't have so many. And, and when I accept
[Guest]: that in myself, I will let my children explore it in themselves. And so in that sense, it's,
[Guest]: it's an ongoing journey. And it's, it can be chaotic, but it's also very liberating.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's so fascinating. And, you know, just thinking aloud, it seems to me that this
[Amit Varma]: is both not, this is both radical and not radical, as you said, at the same time, and
[Amit Varma]: radical, perhaps in the sense that it seems to go against the, the conventional structure
[Amit Varma]: of how you do schooling and all of that, but not radical, because if I think back on myself,
[Amit Varma]: to, you know, to use that phrase of yours, which I will presumably use all the time now,
[Amit Varma]: I'm also an unschooler by nature. Therefore, you know, I learned absolutely nothing in
[Amit Varma]: school and college. I almost made it a point not to out of rebellion. But everything that
[Amit Varma]: I learned, and like, I still take great joy in learning, I try to systematize what I'm
[Amit Varma]: learning, get to first principles and figure stuff out. And I think that that's a beautiful
[Amit Varma]: way to learn. And I think where parents can perhaps come in is that if I look at my own
[Amit Varma]: weakness, as a middle aged unschooler, my weaknesses, or where I fall short, I fall
[Amit Varma]: short in things like a mainly in terms of discipline, but I can imagine other areas
[Amit Varma]: where other people fall short. And I guess if you're working with, you know, teenagers,
[Amit Varma]: then what parents can do is just be, just help them with those weaknesses, which they'll
[Amit Varma]: also recognize and want to change as I do, but not push them along paths that may not
[Amit Varma]: be meant for them, which, you know, takes up so much time and psychic energy away. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, perhaps they don't have to suffer as we did. Yeah. And I mean, there's so many
[Guest]: things that we become ready to learn at very different times in our life. You know, so
[Guest]: as a camera person, in a news organization, I was extremely disciplined, I was always
[Guest]: on time, I could work for hours on end, I, I, you know, I could, I, I won't say I was
[Guest]: not hungry, but I was able to work on an empty stomach for, for, for hours on end, it took
[Guest]: a toll on my body, eventually, it was something that I loved to do for eight years, and then
[Guest]: I didn't want to do for another day of my life. And that was fine. You know, and then
[Guest]: I did something else. And I'm glad that, you know, and we grew up in a time when you had
[Guest]: to, you had to choose one thing. And that was perhaps okay, for my father's generation,
[Guest]: where you were an engineer, and then you remained an engineer for life, or I don't think that
[Guest]: it's true for anyone. I mean, he's a very keen gardener, I have an uncle who's an engineer
[Guest]: who builds the furniture in his house. You know, there are so many of these talents that
[Guest]: we claim at different times in our life. So many people start painting in their middle
[Guest]: years or learn a musical instrument. And it's not like they wasted early years or this whole
[Guest]: idea, you know, you you made that analogy very early you you spoke about schooling being
[Guest]: something that was relevant at a time when you wanted to create workers for industries.
[Guest]: And look how far we have come from there. We are you know, we are in a time of the gig
[Guest]: economy, we are at a time when you can make a living out of being an artist, you can make
[Guest]: a living out of exploring your own talents at different times in your life. I know young people
[Guest]: who, you know, come out of college and love trekking, and within two or three years,
[Guest]: they are earning enough from their passion to be able to fuel some other passion of theirs.
[Guest]: And all of these things in conventional terms are called, you know,
[Guest]: are, we have very perjurative terms for them, when will you settle down?
[Guest]: Aise kap tak chalega? What will you do in your old age? Stuff like that. But we know,
[Guest]: we I mean, you, you came into podcasting, you know, so late, and you've stuck it out.
[Guest]: And who's to say you don't have discipline? I mean, imagine the kind of discipline with which
[Guest]: you've completed that. So a lot of times when I'm having a conversation with other adults about
[Guest]: unschooling, and you know, it's it's a shocking idea, and they'll try to make me understand what
[Guest]: perhaps I'm losing out by making a choice like that. But we always go to, okay, let's look at
[Guest]: our choices. Let's look at when you changed your subject or what you did with what you studied in
[Guest]: school? Or when did you switch careers? Or what is it that you've discovered you're good at?
[Guest]: And what a flexible time we are living in, you know, where, where you can really do
[Guest]: multiple things at the same time. I mean, yeah, we should be a little careful about
[Guest]: doing too many once in a while. But it is, we are kind of in a time where we can realise
[Guest]: we can realise so many of our dreams, and still be able to put food on the table.
[Guest]: And the new generation is going to invent so many newer ways of living.
[Amit Varma]: As Tolkien said, all those who wander are not lost. And in fact, if you don't wonder,
[Amit Varma]: you're probably lost in this day and age. I want to talk about writing now. And I absolutely
[Amit Varma]: loved the epigraph at the start of your first book, where you write quote,
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to be all of myself at the same time. So I wrote wrote wrote myself into fullness.
[Amit Varma]: Stop good, beautiful. And it just so ties into that the theme of journaling,
[Amit Varma]: which we mentioned earlier as a way of discovering and shaping yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And elsewhere, you have written quote, I write to see myself through the tunnel of darkness.
[Amit Varma]: I write myself out of the bottomless well, I sort out my position and my feelings by writing about
[Amit Varma]: them. I write also to make place for love. This is important, stop good. And these are reasons for
[Amit Varma]: writing and perhaps some of them might even be kind of post facto. And you've written eloquently
[Amit Varma]: about all of this about, you know, the importance of sharing writing for a very personal reason to
[Amit Varma]: connect yourself to your mother and understand that better. What I'm interested in particularly
[Amit Varma]: is how you sort of taught yourself the craft of writing. Because when I'm reading something by
[Amit Varma]: you as a reader, I never noticed the writing, which is, you know, the best compliment I can
[Amit Varma]: give, obviously, as you know, and how did you arrive at, you know, being able to write in that
[Amit Varma]: easy, straightforward, lucid way? You know, what was that process like of finding that voice?
[Guest]: I did, I did blog for, for some time, I, I've learned actually to see that as part of the process
[Guest]: in especially because my blog continues to stand where it, where I first created it. And it's as
[Guest]: raw and unprocessed as it was always in the, you know, as I had created it. And I can't say that I
[Guest]: did anything conscious to learn craft. I did gravitate towards certain writers in this
[Guest]: horrendous school of mine, this amazing school of mine that I went to the best part of the school
[Guest]: was a library. It had there was a huge basement library, and a very kind librarian who did not
[Guest]: call you out if she found that you were spending a period in the library when you were supposed to
[Guest]: be in some other class, she allowed you to do that. And this school library of mine gave me
[Guest]: gave me access to many writers that, that I would not have been able that that would neither part
[Guest]: of the syllabus and certainly in my home, where we didn't have a lot of books, we only had Reader's
[Guest]: Digest. We, we, you know, I would not have been able to get access to. And what I began to read
[Guest]: from the library, some of some significant things I read, this is the age of 15 and 16,
[Guest]: black American poets. So who are writing, you know, almost in a haiku style in these very,
[Guest]: very short sentences, like who were the memorable ones? Richard Wright is one Langston Hughes is
[Guest]: Langston Hughes is another one. And then there was there was a copy of Cyrano de Bergerac.
[Guest]: And I was just fascinated by this character. And I think I've borrowed it week after week after
[Guest]: week and then found a copy of it in a bookshop and just managed to buy it with some birthday
[Guest]: money so that I always had a copy of Cyrano de Bergerac. We we had access to Time and Newsweek
[Guest]: then I became as soon as I went to college, I became a member of the British Library as well
[Guest]: as the American Center Library, as well as the IP College Library, and continued to read. And
[Guest]: I would I would say John Steinbeck and J.D. Salinger would be two very strong
[Guest]: influences. And Sweet Thursday is one of Steinbeck's books, lesser known books that I have
[Guest]: read many times over. And if you if you look at it, it's so unconventionally written. There are
[Guest]: different chapters written in different voices, some of which I could not understand because
[Guest]: he was using a southern accent of a homeless black person. And I just couldn't make any head
[Guest]: or tail of it. But I would. But I knew I could kind of hold on to that book and over the years
[Guest]: understand it. The extraordinary authenticity of the voice of Holden Caulfield in Catcher in the
[Guest]: in Catcher in the Rye. I mean, here's sure you're using a young narrator's voice,
[Guest]: the writer's doing that. But he's also breaking all the rules of writing, you know, the kind of
[Guest]: abuse words that are being used, the kind of expression that he's using, the kind of repetitive
[Guest]: way or the meandering way in which he's writing. And because that worked for me, I think what I
[Guest]: did with some of these and they were they were they were great writers. Right. So what I may
[Guest]: have done for myself subconsciously is give myself the permission to write similarly. And in a sense,
[Guest]: what you are then giving up is the fear of, you know, not writing in the way that is supposed to
[Guest]: be good writing, because certainly Holden Caulfield's voice will not fall in that category.
[Guest]: To Kill a Mockingbird was this was a book that I also read again and again. So not just for the
[Guest]: story or the plot, which, of course, spoke to me. On the first page of Kill a Mockingbird,
[Guest]: Jem is 12 years old and he breaks his arm. And I was 12 years old and I, you know, was going
[Guest]: through all of these injuries, similar to Jem. And so it's just crazy how some books will speak to
[Guest]: you. Alice Walker, I picked up The Color Purple recently, and I was so shocked to find out that
[Guest]: I had read this book when I was 16. And, you know, when I read it, my first instinct was put this
[Guest]: away so your daughters don't pick it up. And I said, well, I read it in class 11. And, you know,
[Guest]: there's rape, there's incest, there's, there's abuse. There's so much trauma in that. And but
[Guest]: look at the voice that Alice Walker is using. She's, she's, it's not a, you know, the narrator.
[Guest]: She's not even able to put two perfect sentences together. And I guess what you get from there
[Guest]: is then the confidence to tell your story in your voice and not worry about, you know, whether it's
[Guest]: well crafted or not well crafted, so long as it's, it speaks, you know, it expresses what you want
[Guest]: to say. And it, it moves you in some way to put it out there. And this blog of mine that I
[Guest]: mentioned, so it was, you know, I started it when my middle daughter is two years old, one year old.
[Guest]: This is before I've quit my job. And in the first entry is, I have two amazing children and a
[Guest]: wonderful marriage. I mean, I have a job that I love. These two loves are clashing with each other,
[Guest]: what am I going to do about it, we'll find out. And then entry after entry, I'm trying to solve
[Guest]: that problem. At some point, I quit. And then I carry on with the deconstruction of myself and
[Guest]: picking myself off the floor, you know, in my second life post that job.
[Guest]: But I think that it's like a practice ground, because I didn't open that to anyone to read.
[Guest]: Again, what I was doing was perhaps just cultivating, you know, keeping giving myself
[Guest]: a safe space to be fearless. So as you know, because no one is going to read it, so I'm
[Guest]: literally writing as if no one will ever read it. And therefore, I can let it let all the ugliness
[Guest]: also come out, I don't have to be afraid of either being judged or offending someone.
[Guest]: And, and just continuing to do that, to the point where I start to get read, and I learn from the
[Guest]: readers that it seems to resonate. And then I just kind of build on that with time. And I was just
[Guest]: sharing with somebody recently with one of the writers in my memoir that I to this day, I don't
[Guest]: know, when I write and I send a column, what the, you know, whether it's going to work or not, I
[Guest]: don't know. And, but I, but the only thing I know is from experience, that if that, you know, you
[Guest]: do your job, and, and the rest will just happen, and it's fine, you're not going to crash, you're
[Guest]: not going to be fired, it's not going to be the last thing you ever write. Just, just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: kind of trust your voice, in a sense, I just feel in that question, whether it will work or not the
[Amit Varma]: term work is wrong, in the sense that it has already worked, if you have written it, it's
[Amit Varma]: worked for yourself, right? What the world makes of it is we can't control that, like, this is great
[Amit Varma]: quote by Joan Didion of I don't know what I think until I write it down, right? So in the act of
[Amit Varma]: writing something down, it's done what it had to do for you. And, and then your voice is so
[Amit Varma]: consistent over the years. And perhaps, like you said, you shaped it in your private blog. So
[Amit Varma]: perhaps there is more sort of visible development there. But otherwise, it's just so consistent that
[Amit Varma]: worries like will readers be able to understand or relate would never just strike me.
[Amit Varma]: Going back to the theme of shaping yourself with your writing, and you know what Didion said,
[Amit Varma]: I don't know what I think until I write it down. How did your writing change you? Like,
[Amit Varma]: I would imagine that if you had continued just parenting and not writing about it,
[Amit Varma]: and if you maybe continued down that job or done something else or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: I'd imagine you'd be a different person today. Writing changes everyone. I see that with myself
[Amit Varma]: that everything I do changes me in some way or the other, even if it's podcasting or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: you know, our actions shape us. And we shape our actions back, but more actions might even
[Amit Varma]: shape us more. So how has right how did writing change you as a person, as a mother, as a wife,
[Guest]: just in every sense? Yeah, I'm absolutely sure that I would be a different person.
[Guest]: And in fact, every time I every time I begin to find that I'm becoming bitter and angry,
[Guest]: I know that I must write in a that I must allow myself to write it out of my system.
[Guest]: To answer your question, you know, the second column I wrote for Mint Lounge talks about,
[Guest]: it's just in that moment where the editor calls me and asks me to write the column. And I say,
[Guest]: yeah, sure. And I put the phone down and I have a meltdown. And in that in that meltdown, I'm saying
[Guest]: I will want, I will want to be seen as a certain person to be seen as that person, I will have to
[Guest]: become that person. You know, I will want to be seen to be doing a good job. And for that to work
[Guest]: on paper, I will have to do a good job. So I'm kind of lamenting that I will have to be a better
[Guest]: person to be a better to be a good writer to be the kind of writer I want to be. I'll have to be
[Guest]: I'll have to be a better person. And why couldn't I have lived the unexamined life? I'm kind of
[Guest]: laughing at myself in that moment. And I don't think I mean, I just wrote that out it came and
[Guest]: I wrote it and I thought it would work and I sent it. And, and I over the years I you know,
[Guest]: sometimes when I come go back to that passage, I'm like, oh my god, I had to do it. I literally
[Guest]: did it. You know, I have that there is, you know, if you want it to ring true, then then it has to
[Guest]: be the truth and then then you have to live it. Otherwise, it's not true. So you can't,
[Guest]: you can't be seen as a gentle mother or if you're not being one. And in that sense,
[Guest]: the fact that you're going to tell this story, it defines how you play the character
[Guest]: in the in the story to some extent. There have been times, Amit, when I'm in a situation that is
[Guest]: kind of, you know, emotionally, in which I'm kind of very emotional. And I'm back of my mind is
[Guest]: thinking, I'm going to write about this. And also is thinking, how are you going to end this? Because
[Guest]: if you don't act now, you don't have a story to tell. So if, if I'm very angry, then I have to
[Guest]: do something about that there. Because I, I am not allowed, I have not given myself the permission
[Guest]: to rant. I am not allowed to go and write a story in which he said this to me and I felt so bad,
[Guest]: end of story. What did you do about it? That's the story. What you know, what is what is your
[Guest]: reaction? What is your agency in this story? That is the story. So if I want to talk about it,
[Guest]: then I have to, I have to do something about it. And I find that I, and in many times,
[Guest]: if something's happened in school, I have to go through the whole thing of going to school,
[Guest]: talking to them, giving them a chance, listening to them. And then I can tell the story and say,
[Guest]: I didn't like the way this happened. And this is what I did about it. I can't, so,
[Guest]: yeah, I mean, that I've not given myself the permission to, to just tell stories in which
[Guest]: I'm this little victim and I can blame other people about it. I have to exercise my agency.
[Guest]: And, and therefore I do. If something's happened between my husband and me, and I want to figure
[Guest]: that out, then I have to act. I have to, I mean, whatever the situation may be, even if it's with
[Guest]: the child, I have to have the conversation that I am not being able to have to be able to,
[Guest]: to be able to tell that. This is such a fascinating paradigm shift in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that you're not writing about your life, you're writing your life. That to write, you have to
[Amit Varma]: live it. And, and, you know, everything is kind of, these are sort of feeding into one another.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about your course. What made you think of sort of teaching this? Because obviously,
[Amit Varma]: over a period of time, there's intentionality behind the writing and the craft, you've thought
[Amit Varma]: about it, you've developed to a certain stage, all that is there. But teaching a course then means
[Amit Varma]: that you are explicitly taking all of these things that you might have implicitly learned,
[Amit Varma]: and you're, you know, drawing a code of writing conduct, as it were, and sharing those lessons
[Amit Varma]: and giving it form and structure and then teaching it. And like, what I have found is
[Amit Varma]: that the act of teaching, I think, is even more intense than the act of writing in terms of how
[Amit Varma]: deeply you have to think about something. Because if you're teaching something, you bloody well
[Amit Varma]: you bloody well better know every little aspect of it, you know, in the sense that you have to
[Amit Varma]: know it really well, you have to think about it very deeply. Tell me about that process.
[Guest]: Yeah, so one of the things that I had kind of internalized over time, when I,
[Guest]: you know, when I came out of school and decided not to study English, but to study psychology,
[Guest]: and then I came out of mass communication course, and I decided not to be a reporter,
[Guest]: or a writer, but to be a camera person. And over the years, I began to feel
[Guest]: that maybe I didn't know how to write. And maybe I, you know, clearly, I didn't know,
[Guest]: that's why I didn't do it. And I kind of internalized that stupidly. But, and then when,
[Guest]: when I began to write the column, in a kind of hypersensitive way, I remained a little aware of
[Guest]: the fact that nobody else wrote memoir in weekend columns, that personal writing is often judged in
[Guest]: a certain way. And, and, and then, but, but, but I had enough time, I had enough time of writing
[Guest]: that column for 10 years, to be able to shift from that position. Also, when the books came out,
[Guest]: and they were highly successful, and I met my readers in literary festivals, and there was time
[Guest]: for all of this, you know, garbage to go out, and, and a kind of a comfort level to settle in
[Guest]: with why I was writing how I was writing and what it, why it mattered. But in 2020, mid 2020,
[Guest]: for various reasons, my column was discontinued in Lounge. And to be fair, it was immediately
[Guest]: started in the Tribune. So there was even not even a week's gap, the minute one paper didn't
[Guest]: take it, another paper took it. But times have changed. And my audiences were changing, my
[Guest]: editors concerns were changing. And, and more and more, I felt that I was writing in a space that
[Guest]: was constricting, where, you know, don't write this, because this can get us into trouble,
[Guest]: don't write that, because that's too intense, don't. And it was just from a very, very, you
[Guest]: know, like a river in spate kind of space of what I want, what I could choose to write about,
[Guest]: it was just kind of narrowing into a canal. And that began to get to me, and I guess in a,
[Guest]: not consciously again, but I get I'm, I suppose in a subconscious way, I felt that I need to heal,
[Guest]: I need to heal this in myself. And because I was feeling frustrated.
[Guest]: So this is again, I'm analysing it in retrospect. I started, I announced, I called up a friend,
[Guest]: and I said, you organise writing workshops. And I think I can do a workshop with you. This is
[Guest]: Yoda Press and Arpita Das. And she immediately said yes. And then one of her colleagues
[Guest]: literally sat me down, pursued me, followed me through my imposter syndrome over the next
[Guest]: two months, and put the course together, put it out on social media. And the first lot of people
[Guest]: joined. And when they began to join, and I looked at their profiles, and they were senior to me,
[Guest]: they were writers who had written more than me, very prolific, working journalists,
[Guest]: all kinds of profiles, people who did their own magazine. And I was like, why are they coming?
[Guest]: And you know, so clearly, in my moment of doubt, I had forgotten the body of, you know, I had
[Amit Varma]: forgotten the body of my work. And I haven't met a single woman who doesn't have the imposter
[Guest]: syndrome in some way or the other. Yeah, so sometimes you can completely wipe out
[Guest]: like decades of your work in a moment of panic. But at the same time, looking at these profiles,
[Guest]: I was like, if they are paying to do this, then you, you know, if they're taking this seriously,
[Guest]: then you're going to take this seriously. And, and of course, I was going to take it seriously
[Guest]: anyway, it's just that I expected new learners, I didn't expect, you know, writers with so much
[Guest]: talent, as well as experience, to come to me and say, you know, we want to write in a certain space
[Guest]: and, and we need help with that. But, but that's how it happened. So I kind of went into the first
[Guest]: memoir workshop, especially the first session, blinded by fear. But knowing that, I mean,
[Guest]: it's, it's a little bit like my public speaking experience, you know, just before going on stage,
[Guest]: I'm like, I don't remember any, I don't remember anything. And, and then you go and you begin to
[Guest]: speak. And later, you don't remember what all you've said, but, you know, people are appreciating
[Guest]: it. So it must have worked. So I, so I did the first memoir workshop. And that really kind of
[Guest]: gave me a sense of what I, what I was, what I had in me to offer. And so we had announced four
[Guest]: sessions. And immediately, I was kind of being able to see what the specific needs of each writer
[Guest]: was. And I set up an individual session with each one of them outside of the group sessions.
[Guest]: And that was very, very, it was a little bit like your podcast, it was, you know,
[Guest]: very rewarding on both sides to, to, to explore what is it that our barriers are,
[Guest]: what our strengths are, you know, what, what our histories are, and what do we want to do
[Guest]: with all of this? How do we break through? And it was just such an intimate and engaging experience
[Guest]: that it convinced me that I, that I was ready to go independent, that I was ready to kind of just
[Guest]: put myself out there and announce it, announce more workshops. And the minute I announced the
[Guest]: second one, it got oversubscribed, to the extent that I, you know, simultaneously ran a third one
[Guest]: on another day of the week. And, and we've, we've done these seven workshops. So seven cohorts.
[Guest]: One of my friends used to say, you know, there was a time when,
[Guest]: before my column was stopped, for a while, there was a conflict over it. And every few weeks,
[Guest]: every few weeks, it would seem like, now we're like, really at loggerheads. And this is the end,
[Guest]: this, my call. And it would make me feel, it would make me feel really bad, it would make me kind of
[Guest]: begin to collapse, which also made me realize that what I was doing was writing much more than
[Guest]: a column, you know, that something much bigger than just 1300 words is what was coming out,
[Guest]: because my whole body was reacting to the idea of not doing it. So I needed a substitute.
[Guest]: But in that time, you know, one, I must have said to one of my friends, who's a writer, I said,
[Guest]: will I still be a writer if I don't have a column? And she said, Natasha, you will become a writer
[Guest]: when you stop writing this column. And I was like, what does that mean?
[Amit Varma]: I agree with that. That's what I was about to say just now. Yeah.
[Guest]: And I and for me, it was like, what does that mean? But from it's when I started doing the
[Guest]: workshops, that's when I really kind of began to get a sense of what it means to be a writer.
[Guest]: You know, to be able to read in that way to be able to distill
[Guest]: your learnings in the way that you described, just before I was talking,
[Guest]: to become much more aware of things. And I really strongly feel that it has
[Guest]: it has given more body and form to my own writing. You know, ever since I've been doing,
[Guest]: I have taken more ownership of what I do. I make sure that when my writers in the cohort are
[Guest]: writing, I'm also writing. I make sure that I go to them when they show me their writing,
[Guest]: I show them mine. And then I have to deal with shame. I have to deal with doubt. I have to deal
[Guest]: with, will they still take me seriously as a mentor if they see that this is what I've written
[Guest]: this week? And I have to stand by what I've written. And that's a different level of confidence
[Guest]: level of confidence from, you know, it's being published because an editor needed to fill up
[Guest]: some space or whatever. It's a different level of really literally standing next to
[Guest]: what you've written. It's a little bit like what the books make us do, is when we have to stand
[Guest]: with them. It's an identity then you have to take quite seriously when you.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I think it's interesting how, and I've also obviously taught writing,
[Amit Varma]: and it's interesting how the act of teaching writing can make you a better writer. And that
[Amit Varma]: in turn can make you a different person. I won't say better, but different, that all of this kind
[Amit Varma]: of feeds into each other. So it's so rewarding. So it's not only that you're teaching and the
[Guest]: students are benefiting, but you're also learning. It's very rewarding. It's really,
[Guest]: I mean, one of the things is that despite the fact that the books came out and, you know,
[Guest]: there was all the literary festival circuit thing to do. And I met readers in person and people
[Guest]: wrote to me and they continue to write to me. But a lot of these people who are coming to the,
[Guest]: you know, these cohorts are made of people who have been reading me for years.
[Guest]: And now I am privy to stories of how other people's lives are influenced or changed, or,
[Guest]: you know, they're so hungry to tell me the story. And these are people who have never written to me
[Guest]: over the years. You know, they're not the fan people who will kind of come out and meet you
[Guest]: or come out and meet you somewhere. But they've kind of signed up immediately as soon as this thing
[Guest]: is happening. And sometimes it's so overwhelming that I really have to kind of put on a mask
[Guest]: because, you know, in front of me, there are these 12 windows and everybody's saying,
[Guest]: you know, talking about you as if you're a little guru or something.
[Guest]: And so, temporarily, you kind of have to protect yourself from kind of exploding. But it does,
[Guest]: in a moment of quiet, it does give you a sense of the importance, the relevance of honest writing,
[Guest]: of telling your story, of, you know, demonstrating courage, in a sense. I mean,
[Guest]: a lot of people say how brave you are to write like that. And I don't get it because I have,
[Guest]: you know, I feel so fearful. The process is kind of, I'm conquering so many fears.
[Guest]: And you don't realize that the act of conquering fears is bravery. You know, you're so much like
[Guest]: looking at yourself and saying, I'm so scared. But the fact that you're acting despite your fear
[Guest]: is what it is. And then, yeah, so it really teaches you, it teaches you about yourself,
[Amit Varma]: about your work. I'm guessing that many writers would be plagued with self-doubt when they start,
[Amit Varma]: like I certainly was, where you think that, hey, is it an act of self-indulgence, where you might
[Amit Varma]: wonder if you're being incredibly arrogant, that why would someone want to read me? Right? And
[Amit Varma]: then that moment comes like the one that you've described, where you realize that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: the writing is meaningful to so many people. You know, it's the opposite of self-indulgent,
[Guest]: you're actually doing a service to the world. Yeah. And while I wouldn't put it like that,
[Guest]: but I do, you know, just the last column that I went last week in the Tribune about,
[Guest]: it's being called Hai Bechari, because I'm talking about this concept of people expressing
[Guest]: love by calling you Bechari. I had very little time, I was in the middle of hospital visits,
[Guest]: there was some crisis in the family. And I took some time off into a cafe and wrote it,
[Guest]: and wrote it because some parts of it, I had recorded in my notes. So I had some dialogues,
[Guest]: and then I built the piece from it. And I had no time at that point for fear, doubt, anything.
[Guest]: I had no time for any rewriting, I just had to, you know, clear the copy, I had to write it,
[Guest]: clean it, send it. And at that time, what I was able to do was separate myself
[Guest]: from the act of writing, it's not about you. This needed to come, it has come, it will go,
[Guest]: it will find its destiny. And you just learn so many times over and over again,
[Guest]: that this act of surrender is actually so empowering and so necessary.
[Amit Varma]: That's a beautiful way of putting in this act of surrender. So we are almost out of time,
[Amit Varma]: I think we have a few minutes left. So a couple of final questions. And one is that,
[Amit Varma]: tell me about what else you're doing these days. You're writing, you are doing the course.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you're, you know, parenting and wifing and all of those things. What else
[Amit Varma]: sort of involves you? You said you were involved during the CAA protests. You're clearly someone
[Amit Varma]: who's, you know, socially conscious out there trying to make a difference, especially in these
[Guest]: times. So tell me a little bit about what you've been up to. So two things. One is something that
[Guest]: I've been involved in since 2017, which is this people's campaign called the Karwan-e-Mohabbat,
[Guest]: the caravan of love, that was announced by Harsh Mandar. It was a call to people from
[Guest]: civil society to come together in solidarity with victims of violence who are not receiving
[Guest]: the support that they should be receiving from the state, from the media, from their social groups.
[Guest]: And that's, it's been an amazing learning journey. It's had its moments of pain and trauma
[Guest]: and even burnout, emotional burnout in many ways. It's been hard on the family. Although it nearly
[Guest]: started as a family project, it was the first thing that Afzal and I were doing together that
[Guest]: both of us were equally involved in. And I was just out there publicly because as a writer,
[Guest]: I had a role to play. So that then got us involved in the, when the NRC was announced in Assam,
[Guest]: we were working with communities there. Quite naturally, it became part of the anti-CA
[Guest]: protests, then the rehabilitation of victims of the Delhi violence. And then immediately when
[Guest]: lockdown happened, you know, this huge civil society role that needed to be played when we
[Guest]: had migrants, hungry and homeless migrant labor on the streets of India. And so that's kind of
[Guest]: been very intense in many ways. I've revived the filmmaker in me to kind of lead the media team
[Guest]: of the Karwane Mohabbat. We've been not only documenting stories of victimization, but also
[Guest]: stories of solidarity of India's very living, throbbing, syncretic culture, the vestiges of
[Guest]: of it in some places, but also the very aliveness of it in other places. Documenting stories of
[Guest]: people, it's been quite amazing. What I'm starting to do next month is kind of also revive the
[Guest]: teacher in me. Teaching, it's been my calling. And at various times, it's either been a very
[Guest]: conventional teacher type role, or it's been more of a trainer role in media. But after a long gap
[Guest]: of teaching in Delhi University and the Express Institute of Media Studies, where I was teaching
[Guest]: regularly, after a longish gap of about five or six years, I'm going back to work, teach
[Guest]: undergrad students, undergrad and postgrad students. And I'm really excited about it because
[Guest]: I have not spent time recently with this age group.
[Amit Varma]: And this is at Ashoka.
[Guest]: And this is at Ashoka University. So, I mean, I'm a little more excited than a professor should be.
[Guest]: At Ashoka, they just, you know, all the teachers are called professors. So, I'm already Professor
[Guest]: Badwar. I'm already being addressed as such. And I'm suddenly having a little bit of a wow,
[Guest]: this sounds good moment. But I think that it's really fantastic to have the opportunity
[Guest]: to work with young Indians, to be able to share, you know, your experiences and your
[Guest]: hopes and dreams with them and to be able to participate in, you know, to get to be witness
[Guest]: to what it is that they are thinking, doing, and help them channel it in some way.
[Guest]: Yeah, so these things are coming back. I'm also taking on freelance filmmaking projects. So,
[Guest]: for the first time, I'm kind of independently working with a group of younger filmmakers,
[Guest]: filmmakers, so that all of these things can happen at the same time.
[Guest]: And I'm very tempted to employ my children soon, but I should be careful.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I was just thinking that they must be so terrified that you'll combine two of these things
[Amit Varma]: and start a vlog featuring them and you'll have a camera all the time at home and all that.
[Guest]: No, they're very sagacious in how they advise me. And they'll be like,
[Guest]: No, mama, I don't think you should do that. And of course, I'm very obedient. So.
[Amit Varma]: So, okay, final question, which I asked many of my guests on the show, recommend for me and my
[Amit Varma]: listeners, some books, films, music, which you absolutely love. And a little while earlier,
[Amit Varma]: you spoke about a lot of the books which influenced you. But, you know, apart from
[Amit Varma]: those which you've already named, you know, books, films, music, which means so much to you,
[Amit Varma]: you love them, you'd want to share them with everyone.
[Guest]: Let me start with music. Last week, Naira Noor passed away. And I certainly would want to mention
[Guest]: her to a new generation, to many generations of people who are listening. She sang ghazals,
[Guest]: she sang fairs. She had the sweetest voice. And I'll send you a link, Amit. She sang a very
[Guest]: beautiful song that stayed with me so much that it was the lullaby that I would sing to my children.
[Guest]: It's very poetic. And it's not fairs. It's not a ghazal. But it's a very dreamlike song about
[Guest]: butterflies and fireflies. What's it called?
[Guest]: Hume Titliyon Ke Jugnoon Ke Desh Jaana Hain. It's almost like a child and a mother are kind of
[Guest]: in a dreamscape. I love the metaphors in it. So I would very much like to recommend Naira Noor
[Guest]: as a writer, as a singer. Books. Yeah, I mentioned some. I'd say read everything, really.
[Guest]: It was one of the little learnings on the way of has been because I grew up in a home without books.
[Guest]: It was my ambition to raise my children in a home full of books. And I did then fill up bookshelves
[Guest]: with my books and expected my children to read them. And my children don't want to read any of
[Guest]: the books necessarily that I have brought in. They discovered a whole new set of writers.
[Guest]: They read entirely different genres. Sometimes they come back and read Pride and Prejudice and
[Guest]: you know, they're fond of Little Women and some of the classics. But they have brought in a whole
[Guest]: new library into my home. And that's really taught me to let readers go. You know, they just
[Guest]: just totally really let them go and read everything, read whatever you like. Fiction,
[Guest]: non-fiction. I think there is something, many of us have a little bit of a magical ability to just
[Guest]: find what we need, you know, left alone in a bookshop or in a secondhand bookshop. We'll just,
[Guest]: we tend to gravitate towards certain kind of readers and we should give ourselves the permission
[Guest]: to do that. Not worry about whether it's famous or economical or on sale or not. What's the third
[Guest]: thing? Films. Oh, watch a lot of animation. Watch Miyazaki. Watch Miyazaki with your family. It's
[Guest]: something we do a lot. And one of our favorite dialogues, my husband's favorite dialogues is
[Guest]: Respect Your Father. It's from a film called Ponyo. And we always answer him with Suspect
[Guest]: Your Father. But you didn't hear it right. That's what the real dialogue was. And it's got this
[Guest]: eccentric looking father trying to protect his daughter who's on her own happy journey.
[Guest]: Yeah, so watch a lot of animation. Watch films from Southeast Asia. My daughters are discovering
[Guest]: this, the rage in my home these days is Bad Buddy. So shows, I would say, watch a lot of
[Guest]: Southeast Asian shows. I think they're very sensitively made. And there's a whole new
[Guest]: language of emotions that they're expressing. Like which are the ones which have struck you?
[Guest]: As far as names go, I can only name Bad Buddy. But you send me the links and I'll put them up soon.
[Guest]: I'll definitely send them to you. But yeah, watch a lot of animation. Watch films from
[Guest]: Southeast Asia. I'll definitely send them to you. I watch very few films. But Masaan has stayed with
[Guest]: me. Mirch Masala is a classic that I often tell my children the story of Mirch Masala. And they
[Guest]: insist that they cannot watch the film because they can't take this kind of intensity. But they
[Guest]: like to hear the story. And yeah, I just go for popular culture. Great, you know, it's been an
[Amit Varma]: incredible however many hours we sat here. And, you know, during this time, also that phenomenon
[Amit Varma]: I described to you, that was happening with you. Whereas three, four times, you've looked like
[Amit Varma]: different people I know, and I won't name them. And it's very interesting. But one thing that I
[Amit Varma]: found is when you were talking about your daughters, you know, at one moment, I just
[Amit Varma]: saw that you look like you were dancing, there was so much rapture on your face,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and it was perhaps is because of the way the light was falling particularly luminous. So
[Amit Varma]: I wish I could have taken a picture and you know, saved it for your kids. But
[Amit Varma]: Natasha, thank you so much for your time today.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. Thank you. It's been wonderful having this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do share it with anyone you think might enjoy
[Amit Varma]: listening to it. In fact, do that with any previous episode that you have liked as well.
[Amit Varma]: Spread the joy. Check out the show notes, enter rabbit holes that will tons of great links.
[Amit Varma]: Do visit your nearest bookstore online or offline and pick up both books by Natasha.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Natasha on Twitter at Natasha Badwar. That's one word. You can follow me
[Amit Varma]: at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of the
[Amit Varma]: seen and the unseen at seen unseen.in. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of the seen and the unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to seen unseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.